I

_How the Centaur Trained the Heroes on Pelion_

I have told you of a hero who fought with wild beasts and with wild men;
but now I have a tale of heroes who sailed away into a distant land to
win themselves renown forever, in the adventure of the Golden Fleece.

Whither they sailed, my children, I cannot clearly tell. It all happened
long ago; so long that it has all grown dim, like a dream which you
dreamed last year. And why they went, I cannot tell; some say that it
was to win gold. It may be so; but the noblest deeds which have been
done on earth, have not been done for gold. It was not for the sake of
gold that the Lord came down and died, and the Apostles went out to
preach the good news in all lands. The Spartans looked for no reward in
money when they fought and died at Thermopylæ; and Socrates the wise
asked no pay from his countrymen, but lived poor and barefoot all his
days, only caring to make men good. And there are heroes in our days
also, who do noble deeds, but not for gold. Our discoverers did not go
to make themselves rich, when they sailed out one after another into the
dreary frozen seas; nor did the ladies, who went out last year, to
drudge in the hospitals of the East, making themselves poor, that they
might be rich in noble works. And young men, too, whom you know,
children, and some of them of your own kin, did they say to themselves,
"How much money shall I earn?" when they went out to the war, leaving
wealth, and comfort, and a pleasant home, and all that money can give,
to face hunger and thirst, and wounds and death, that they might fight
for their country and their Queen? No, children, there is a better thing
on earth than wealth, a better thing than life itself; and that is, to
have done something before you die, for which good men may honour you,
and God your Father smile upon your work.

Therefore we will believe--why should we not--of these same Argonauts of
old, that they, too, were noble men, who planned and did a noble deed;
and that therefore their fame has lived, and been told in story and in
song, mixed up, no doubt, with dreams and fables, yet true and right at
heart. So we will honour these old Argonauts, and listen to their story
as it stands; and we will try to be like them, each of us in our place;
for each of us has a Golden Fleece to seek, and a wild sea to sail over,
ere we reach it, and dragons to fight ere it be ours.

And what was that first Golden Fleece? I do not know, nor care. The old
Hellenes said that it hung in Colchis, which we call the Circassian
coast, nailed to a beech tree in the war-god's wood; and that it was the
fleece of the wondrous ram, who bore Phrixus and Helle across the Euxine
Sea. For Phrixus and Helle were the children of the cloud nymph, and of
Athamas the Minuan king. And when a famine came upon the land, their
cruel stepmother, Ino, wished to kill them, that her own children might
reign, and said that they must be sacrificed on an altar, to turn away
the anger of the gods. So the poor children were brought to the altar,
and the priest stood ready with his knife, when out of the clouds came
the Golden Ram, and took them on his back, and vanished. Then madness
came upon that foolish king Athamas, and ruin upon Ino and her children.
For Athamas killed one of them in his fury, and Ino fled from him with
the other in her arms, and leaped from a cliff into the sea, and was
changed into a dolphin, such as you have seen, which wanders over the
waves forever sighing, with its little one clasped to its breast.

But the people drove out King Athamas, because he had killed his child;
and he roamed about in his misery, till he came to the Oracle in Delphi.
And the Oracle told him that he must wander for his sin, till the wild
beasts should feast him as their guest. So he went on in hunger and
sorrow for many a weary day, till he saw a pack of wolves. The wolves
were tearing a sheep; but when they saw Athamas they fled, and left the
sheep for him, and he ate of it; and then he knew that the oracle was
fulfilled at last. So he wandered no more; but settled, and built a
town, and became a king again.

But the ram carried the two children far away over land and sea, till he
came to the Thracian Chersonese, and there Helle fell into the sea. So
those narrow straits are called "Hellespont," after her; and they bear
that name until this day.

Then the ram flew on with Phrixus to the northeast across the sea which
we call the Black Sea now; but the Hellenes called it Euxine. And at
last, they say, he stopped at Colchis, on the steep Circassian coast;
and there Phrixus married Chalchiope, the daughter of Aietes the king;
and offered the ram in sacrifice; and Aietes nailed the ram's fleece to
a beech, in the grove of Ares the war god.

And after awhile Phrixus died, and was buried, but his spirit had no
rest; for he was buried far from his native land, and the pleasant hills
of Hellas. So he came in dreams to the heroes of the Minuai, and called
sadly by their beds: "Come and set my spirit free, that I may go home to
my fathers and to my kinsfolk, and the pleasant Minuan land."

And they asked: "How shall we set your spirit free?"

"You must sail over the sea to Colchis, and bring home the golden
fleece; and then my spirit will come back with it, and I shall sleep
with my fathers and have rest."

He came thus, and called to them often, but when they woke they looked
at each other, and said: "Who dare sail to Colchis, or bring home the
golden fleece?" And in all the country none was brave enough to try it;
for the man and the time were not come.

Phrixus had a cousin called AEson, who was king in Iolcos by the sea.
There he ruled over the rich Minuan heroes, as Athamas his uncle ruled
in Bœotia; and like Athamas, he was an unhappy man. For he had a
stepbrother named Pelias, of whom some said that he was a nymph's son,
and there were dark and sad tales about his birth. When he was a babe he
was cast out on the mountains, and a wild mare came by and kicked him.
But a shepherd passing found the baby, with its face all blackened by
the blow; and took him home, and called him Pelias, because his face was
bruised and black. And he grew up fierce and lawless, and did many a
fearful deed; and at last he drove out AEson his stepbrother, and then
his own brother Neleus, and took the kingdom to himself, and ruled over
the rich Minuan heroes, in Iolcos by the sea.

And AEson, when he was driven out, went sadly away out of the town,
leading his little son by the hand; and he said to himself, "I must hide
the child in the mountains; or Pelias will surely kill him, because he
is the heir."

So he went up from the sea across the valley, through the vineyards and
the olive groves, and across the torrent of Anauros, toward Pelion the
ancient mountain, whose brows are white with snow.

He went up and up into the mountain over marsh, and crag, and down, till
the boy was tired and footsore, and AEson had to bear him in his arms,
till he came to the mouth of a lonely cave, at the foot of a mighty
cliff.

Above the cliff the snow wreaths hung, dripping and cracking in the sun.
But at its foot around the cave's mouth grew all fair flowers and herbs,
as if in a garden, ranged in order, each sort by itself. There they grew
gayly in the sunshine, and the spray of the torrent from above; while
from the cave came the sound of music, and a man's voice singing to the
harp.

Then AEson put down the lad, and whispered:

"Fear not, but go in, and whomsoever you shall find, lay your hands upon
his knees, and say, 'In the name of Zeus the father of gods and men, I
am your guest from this day forth.'"

Then the lad went in without trembling, for he, too, was a hero's son;
but when he was within, he stopped in wonder, to listen to that magic
song.

And there he saw the singer lying upon bear skins and fragrant boughs;
Cheiron, the ancient centaur, the wisest of all things beneath the sky.
Down to the waist he was a man; but below he was a noble horse; his
white hair rolled down over his broad shoulders, and his white beard
over his broad brown chest; and his eyes were wise and mild, and his
forehead like a mountain wall.

And in his hands he held a harp of gold, and struck it with a golden
key; and as he struck, he sang till his eyes glittered, and filled all
the cave with light.

And he sang of the birth of Time, and of the heavens and the dancing
stars; and of the ocean, and the ether, and the fire, and the shaping of
the wondrous earth. And he sang of the treasures of the hills, and the
hidden jewels of the mine, and the veins of fire and metal, and the
virtues of all healing herbs, and of the speech of birds, and of
prophecy, and of hidden things to come.

Then he sang of health, and strength, and manhood, and a valiant heart;
and of music, and hunting, and wrestling, and all the games which heroes
love; and of travel, and wars, and sieges, and a noble death in fight;
and then he sang of peace and plenty, and of equal justice in the land;
and as he sang, the boy listened wide eyed, and forgot his errand in the
song.

And at the last old Cheiron was silent, and called the lad with a soft
voice.

And the lad ran trembling to him, and would have laid his hands upon his
knees; but Cheiron smiled, and said, "Call hither your father AEson, for
I know you, and all that has befallen, and saw you both afar in the
valley, even before you left the town."

Then AEson came in sadly, and Cheiron asked him, "Why came you not
yourself to me, AEson the AEolid?"

And AEson said:

"I thought, Cheiron will pity the lad if he sees him come alone; and I
wished to try whether he was fearless, and dare venture like a hero's
son. But now I entreat you by Father Zeus, let the boy be your guest
till better times, and train him among the sons of the heroes, that he
may avenge his father's house."

Then Cheiron smiled, and drew the lad to him, and laid his hand upon his
golden locks, and said, "Are you afraid of my horse's hoofs, fair boy,
or will you be my pupil from this day?"

"I would gladly have horse's hoofs like you, if I could sing such songs
as yours."

And Cheiron laughed, and said, "Sit here by me till sundown, when your
playfellows will come home, and you shall learn like them to be a king,
worthy to rule over gallant men."

Then he turned to AEson, and said, "Go back in peace, and bend before the
storm like a prudent man. This boy shall not cross the Anauros again,
till he has become a glory to you and to the house of AEolus."

And AEson wept over his son and went away; but the boy did not weep, so
full was his fancy of that strange cave, and the Centaur, and his song,
and the playfellows whom he was to see.

Then Cheiron put the lyre into his hands, and taught him how to play it,
till the sun sank low behind the cliff, and a shout was heard outside.

And then in came the sons of the heroes, AEneas, and Heracles, and
Peleus, and many another mighty name.

And great Cheiron leapt up joyfully, and his hoofs made the cave
resound, as they shouted, "Come out, Father Cheiron; come out and see
our game." And one cried, "I have killed two deer," and another, "I took
a wildcat among the crags"; and Heracles dragged a wild goat after him
by its horns, for he was as huge as a mountain crag; and Cæneus carried
a bear cub under each arm, and laughed when they scratched and bit; for
neither tooth nor steel could wound him.

And Cheiron praised them all, each according to his deserts.

Only one walked apart and silent, Asclepius, the too-wise child, with
his bosom full of herbs and flowers, and round his wrist a spotted
snake; he came with downcast eyes to Cheiron, and whispered how he had
watched the snake cast his old skin, and grow young again before his
eyes, and how he had gone down into a village in the vale, and cured a
dying man with a herb which he had seen a sick goat eat.

And Cheiron smiled, and said: "To each Athené and Apollo give some gift,
and each is worthy in his place; but to this child they have given an
honour beyond all honours, to cure while others kill."

Then the lads brought in wood, and split it, and lighted a blazing fire;
and others skinned the deer and quartered them, and set them to roast
before the fire; and while the venison was cooking they bathed in the
snow torrent, and washed away the dust and sweat.

And then all ate till they could eat no more (for they had tasted
nothing since the dawn), and drank of the clear spring water, for wine
is not fit for growing lads. And when the remnants were put away, they
all lay down upon the skins and leaves about the fire, and each took the
lyre in turn, and sang and played with all his heart.

And after a while they all went out to a plot of grass at the cave's
mouth, and there they boxed, and ran, and wrestled, and laughed till the
stones fell from the cliffs.

Then Cheiron took his lyre, and all the lads joined hands; and as he
played, they danced to his measure, in and out, and round and round.
There they danced hand in hand, till the night fell over land and sea,
while the black glen shone with their broad white limbs, and the gleam
of their golden hair.

And the lad danced with them, delighted, and then slept a wholesome
sleep, upon fragrant leaves of bay, and myrtle, and marjoram, and
flowers of thyme; and rose at the dawn, and bathed in the torrent, and
became a schoolfellow to the heroes' sons, and forgot Iolcos, and his
father, and all his former life. But he grew strong, and brave and
cunning, upon the pleasant downs of Pelion, in the keen hungry mountain
air. And he learnt to wrestle, and to box, and to hunt, and to play upon
the harp; and next he learnt to ride, for old Cheiron used to mount him
on his back; and he learnt the virtues of all herbs, and how to cure all
wounds; and Cheiron called him Jason the healer, and that is his name
until this day.


PART II

_How Jason Lost His Sandal in Anauros_

And ten years came and went, and Jason was grown to be a mighty man.
Some of his fellows were gone, and some were growing up by his side.
Asclepius was gone into Peloponnese, to work his wondrous cures on men;
and some say he used to raise the dead to life. And Heracles was gone to
Thebes, to fulfil those famous labours which have become a proverb among
men. And Peleus had married a sea nymph, and his wedding is famous to
this day. And AEneas was gone home to Troy, and many a noble tale you
will read of him, and of all the other gallant heroes, the scholars of
Cheiron the just. And it happened on a day that Jason stood on the
mountain, and looked north and south and east and west; and Cheiron
stood by him and watched him, for he knew that the time was come.

And Jason looked and saw the plains of Thessaly, where the Lapithai
breed their horses; and the lake of Boibé, and the stream which runs
northward to Peneus and Tempe; and he looked north, and saw the mountain
wall which guards the Magnesian shore; Olympus, the seat of the
Immortals, and Ossa, and Pelion, where he stood. Then he looked east and
saw the bright blue sea, which stretched away forever toward the dawn.
Then he looked south, and saw a pleasant land, with white-walled towns
and farms, nestling along the shore of a land-locked bay, while the
smoke rose blue among the trees; and he knew it for the bay of Pagasai,
and the rich lowlands of Hæmonia, and Iolcos by the sea.

Then he sighed, and asked: "Is it true what the heroes tell me, that I
am heir of that fair land?"

"And what good would it be to you, Jason, if you were heir of that fair
land?"

"I would take it and keep it."

"A strong man has taken it and kept it long. Are you stronger than
Pelias the terrible?"

"I can try my strength with his," said Jason. But Cheiron sighed and
said:

"You have many a danger to go through before you rule in Iolcos by the
sea; many a danger, and many a woe; and strange troubles in strange
lands, such as man never saw before."

"The happier I," said Jason, "to see what man never saw before."

And Cheiron sighed again, and said: "The eaglet must leave the nest when
it is fledged. Will you go to Iolcos by the sea? Then promise me two
things before you go."

Jason promised, and Cheiron answered: "Speak harshly to no soul whom you
may meet, and stand by the word which you shall speak."

Jason wondered why Cheiron asked this of him; but he knew that the
Centaur was a prophet, and saw things long before they came. So he
promised, and leapt down the mountain, to take his fortune like a man.

He went down through the arbutus thickets, and across the downs of
thyme, till he came to the vineyard walls, and the pomegranates and the
olives in the glen; and among the olives roared Anauros, all foaming
with a summer flood.

And on the bank of Anauros sat a woman, all wrinkled gray, and old; her
head shook palsied on her breast, and her hands shook palsied on her
knees; and when she saw Jason, she spoke whining: "Who will carry me
across the flood?"

Jason was bold and hasty, and was just going to leap into the flood; and
yet he thought twice before he leapt, so loud roared the torrent down,
all brown from the mountain rains, and silver veined with melting snow;
while underneath he could hear the boulders rumbling like the tramp of
horsemen or the roll of wheels, as they ground along the narrow channel,
and shook the rocks on which he stood.

But the old woman whined all the more: "I am weak and old, fair youth.
For Hera's sake, carry me over the torrent."

And Jason was going to answer her scornfully, when Cheiron's words came
to his mind.

So he said: "For Hera's sake, the Queen of the Immortals on Olympus, I
will carry you over the torrent, unless we both are drowned midway."

Then the old dame leapt upon his back, as nimbly as a goat; and Jason
staggered in, wondering; and the first step was up to his knees.

The first step was up to his knees, and the second step was up to his
waist; and the stones rolled about his feet, and his feet slipped about
the stones; so he went on staggering and panting, while the old woman
cried from off his back:

"Fool, you have wet my mantle! Do you make game of poor old souls like
me?"

Jason had half a mind to drop her, and let her get through the torrent
by herself; but Cheiron's words were in his mind, and he said only:
"Patience, mother; the best horse may stumble some day."

At last he staggered to the shore, and set her down upon the bank; and a
strong man he needed to have been, or that wild water he never would
have crossed.

He lay panting awhile upon the bank, and then leapt up to go upon his
journey; but he cast one look at the old woman, for he thought, "She
should thank me once at least."

And as he looked, she grew fairer than all women, and taller than all
men on earth; and her garments shone like the summer sea, and her jewels
like the stars of heaven; and over her forehead was a veil, woven of the
golden clouds of sunset; and through the veil she looked down on him,
with great soft heifer's eyes; with great eyes, mild and awful, which
filled all the glen with light.

And Jason fell upon his knees, and hid his face between his hands.

And she spoke: "I am the Queen of Olympus, Hera the wife of Zeus. As
thou hast done to me, so will I do to thee. Call on me in the hour of
need, and try if the Immortals can forget."

And when Jason looked up, she rose from off the earth, like a pillar of
tall white cloud, and floated away across the mountain peaks, toward
Olympus the holy hill.

Then a great fear fell on Jason; but after a while he grew light of
heart; and he blessed old Cheiron, and said: "Surely the Centaur is a
prophet, and guessed what would come to pass, when he bade me speak
harshly to no soul whom I might meet."

Then he went down toward Iolcos, and as he walked, he found that he had
lost one of his sandals in the flood.

And as he went through the streets, the people came out to look at him,
so tall and fair was he; but some of the elders whispered together; and
at last one of them stopped Jason, and called to him: "Fair lad, who are
you, and whence come you; and what is your errand in the town?"

"My name, good father, is Jason, and I come from Pelion up above; and my
errand is to Pelias your king; tell me then where his palace is."

But the old man started, and grew pale, and said, "Do you not know the
oracle, my son, that you go so boldly through the town, with but one
sandal on?"

"I am a stranger here, and know of no oracle; but what of my one sandal?
I lost the other in Anauros, while I was struggling with the flood."

Then the old man looked back to his companions; and one sighed and
another smiled; at last he said: "I will tell you, lest you rush upon
your ruin unawares. The oracle in Delphi has said, that a man wearing
one sandal should take the kingdom from Pelias, and keep it for
himself. Therefore beware how you go up to his palace, for he is the
fiercest and most cunning of all kings."

Then Jason laughed a great laugh, like a war horse in his pride: "Good
news, good father, both for you and me. For that very end I came into
the town."

Then he strode on toward the palace of Pelias, while all the people
wondered at his bearing.

And he stood in the doorway and cried, "Come out, come out, Pelias the
valiant, and fight for your kingdom like a man."

Pelias came out wondering, and "Who are you, bold youth?" he cried.

"I am Jason, the son of AEson, the heir of all this land."

Then Pelias lifted up his hands and eyes, and wept, or seemed to weep;
and blessed the heavens which had brought his nephew to him, never to
leave him more. "For," said he, "I have but three daughters, and no son
to be my heir. You shall be my heir then, and rule the kingdom after me,
and marry whichsoever of my daughters you shall choose; though a sad
kingdom you will find it, and whosoever rules it a miserable man. But
come in, come in, and feast."

So he drew Jason in, whether he would or not, and spoke to him so
lovingly and feasted him so well, that Jason's anger passed; and after
supper his three cousins came into the hall, and Jason thought that he
should like well enough to have one of them for his wife.

But at last he said to Pelias, "Why do you look so sad, my uncle? And
what did you mean just now, when you said that this was a doleful
kingdom, and its ruler a miserable man?"

Then Pelias sighed heavily again and again and again, like a man who
had to tell some dreadful story and was afraid to begin; but at last:

"For seven long years and more have I never known a quiet night; and no
more will he who comes after me, till the golden fleece be brought
home."

Then he told Jason the story of Phrixus, and of the golden fleece; and
told him, too, which was a lie, that Phrixus's spirit tormented him,
calling to him day and night. And his daughters came, and told the same
tale (for their father had taught them their parts) and wept, and said,
"Oh, who will bring home the golden fleece, that our uncle's spirit may
have rest; and that we may have rest also, whom he never lets sleep in
peace?"

Jason sat awhile, sad and silent; for he had often heard of that golden
fleece; but he looked on it as a thing hopeless and impossible for any
mortal man to win it.

But when Pelias saw him silent, he began to talk of other things, and
courted Jason more and more, speaking to him as if he was certain to be
his heir, and asking his advice about the kingdom; till Jason who was
young and simple, could not help saying to himself, "Surely he is not
the dark man whom people call him. Yet why did he drive my father out?"
And he asked Pelias boldly, "Men say that you are terrible, and a man of
blood; but I find you a kind and hospitable man; and as you are to me,
so will I be to you. Yet why did you drive my father out?"

Pelias smiled and sighed: "Men have slandered me in that, as in all
things. Your father was growing old and weary, and he gave the kingdom
up to me of his own will. You shall see him to-morrow, and ask him; and
he will tell you the same."

Jason's heart leapt in him, when he heard that he was to see his
father; and he believed all that Pelias said, forgetting that his father
might not dare to tell the truth.

"One thing more there is," said Pelias, "on which I need your advice;
for though you are young, I see in you a wisdom beyond your years. There
is one neighbour of mine, whom I dread more than all men on earth. I am
stronger than he now, and can command him; but I know that if he stay
among us, he will work my ruin in the end. Can you give me a plan,
Jason, by which I can rid myself of that man?"

After awhile, Jason answered, half laughing, "Were I you, I would send
him to fetch that same golden fleece; for if he once set forth after it
you would never be troubled with him more."

And at that a bitter smile came across Pelias's lips, and a flash of
wicked joy into his eyes; and Jason saw it, and started; and over his
mind came the warning of the old man, and his own one sandal, and the
oracle, and he saw that he was taken in a trap.

But Pelias only answered gently, "My son, he shall be sent forthwith."

"You mean me?" cried Jason, starting up, "because I came here with one
sandal?" And he lifted his fist angrily, while Pelias stood up to him
like a wolf at bay; and whether of the two was the stronger and the
fiercer, it would be hard to tell.

But after a moment Pelias spoke gently, "Why then so rash, my son? You,
and not I, have said what is said; why blame me for what I have not
done? Had you bid me love the man of whom I spoke, and make him my
son-in-law and heir, I would have obeyed you; and what if I obey you
now, and send the man to win himself immortal fame? I have not harmed
you, or him. One thing at least I know, that he will go, and that
gladly; for he has a hero's heart within him; loving glory, and scorning
to break the word which he has given."

Jason saw that he was entrapped; but his second promise to Cheiron came
into his mind, and he thought, "What if the Centaur were a prophet in
that also, and meant that I should win the fleece!" Then he cried aloud:

"You have well spoken, cunning uncle of mine! I love glory, and I dare
keep to my word. I will go and fetch this golden fleece. Promise me but
this in return, and keep your word as I keep mine. Treat my father
lovingly while I am gone, for the sake of the all-seeing Zeus; and give
me up the kingdom for my own, on the day that I bring back the golden
fleece."

Then Pelias looked at him and almost loved him, in the midst of all his
hate; and said, "I promise, and I will perform. It will be no shame to
give up my kingdom to the man who wins that fleece."

Then they swore a great oath between them; and afterward both went in,
and lay down to sleep.

But Jason could not sleep, for thinking of his mighty oath, and how he
was to fulfil it, all alone, and without wealth or friends. So he tossed
a long time upon his bed, and thought of this plan and of that; and
sometimes Phrixus seemed to call him, in a thin voice, faint and low, as
if it came from far across the sea, "Let me come home to my fathers and
have rest." And sometimes he seemed to see the eyes of Hera, and to hear
her words again, "Call on me in the hour of need, and see if the
Immortals can forget."

And on the morrow he went to Pelias, and said, "Give me a victim, that I
may sacrifice to Hera." So he went up, and offered his sacrifice; and
as he stood by the altar, Hera sent a thought into his mind; and he went
back to Pelias, and said:

"If you are indeed in earnest, give me two heralds, that they may go
round to all the princes of the Minuai who were pupils of the Centaur
with me, that we may fit out a ship together, and take what shall
befall."

At that Pelias praised his wisdom, and hastened to send the heralds out;
for he said in his heart: "Let all the princes go with him, and like
him, never return; for so I shall be lord of all the Minuai, and the
greatest king in Hellas."


PART III

_How They Built the Ship Argo in Iolcos_

So the heralds went out, and cried to all the heroes of the Minuai, "Who
dare come to the adventure of the golden fleece?"

And Hera stirred the hearts of all the princes, and they came from all
their valleys to the yellow sands of Pagasai. And first came Heracles
the mighty, with his lion's skin and club, and behind him Hylas his
young squire, who bore his arrows and his bow; and Tiphys, the skilful
steersman; and Butes, the fairest of all men; and Castor and Polydeuces
the twins, the sons of the magic swan; and Caineus, the strongest of
mortals, whom the Centaurs tried in vain to kill, and overwhelmed him
with trunks of pine trees, but even so he would not die; and thither
came Zetes and Calais, the winged sons of the north wind; and Peleus,
the father of Achilles, whose bride was silver-footed Thetis the goddess
of the sea. And thither came Telamon and Oileus, the fathers of the two
Aiantes, who fought upon the plains of Troy; and Mopsus, the wise
soothsayer, who knew the speech of birds; and Idmon, to whom Phœbus
gave a tongue to prophesy of things to come; and Ancaios, who could read
the stars, and knew all the circles of the heavens; and Argus, the famed
shipbuilder, and many a hero more, in helmets of brass and gold with
tall dyed horsehair crests, and embroidered shirts of linen beneath
their coats of mail, and greaves of polished tin to guard their knees in
fight; with each man his shield upon his shoulder, of many a fold of
tough bull's hide, and his sword of tempered bronze in his
silver-studded belt, and in his right hand a pair of lances, of the
heavy white-ash stave.

So they came down to Iolcos, and all the city came out to meet them, and
were never tired with looking at their height, and their beauty, and
their gallant bearing, and the glitter of their inlaid arms. And some
said, "Never was such a gathering of the heroes since the Hellenes
conquered the land." But the women sighed over them, and whispered,
"Alas! they are all going to the death."

Then they felled the pines on Pelion, and shaped them with the axe, and
Argus taught them to build a galley, the first long ship which ever
sailed the seas. They pierced her for fifty oars, an oar for each hero
of the crew, and pitched her with coal-black pitch, and painted her bows
with vermilion; and they named her Argo after Argus, and worked at her
all day long. And at night Pelias feasted them like a king, and they
slept in his palace porch.

But Jason went away to the northward, and into the land of Thrace, till
he found Orpheus, the prince of minstrels, where he dwelt in his cave
under Rhodope, among the savage Cicon tribes. And he asked him: "Will
you leave your mountains, Orpheus, my fellow scholar in old times, and
cross Strymon once more with me, to sail with the heroes of the Minuai,
and bring home the golden fleece, and charm for us all men and all
monsters with your magic harp and song?"

Then Orpheus sighed: "Have I not had enough of toil and of weary
wandering far and wide, since I lived in Cheiron's cave, above Iolcos by
the sea? In vain is the skill and the voice which my goddess mother gave
me; in vain have I sung and laboured; in vain I went down to the dead,
and charmed all the kings of Hades, to win back Eurydice my bride. For I
won her, my beloved, and lost her again the same day, and wandered away
in my madness, even to Egypt and the Libyan sands, and the isles of all
the seas, driven on by the terrible gadfly, while I charmed in vain the
hearts of men, and the savage forest beasts, and the trees, and the
lifeless stones, with my magic harp and song, giving rest, but finding
none. But at last Calliope, my mother, delivered me, and brought me home
in peace; and I dwell here in the cave alone, among the savage Cicon
tribes, softening their wild hearts with music and the gentle laws of
Zeus. And now I must go out again, to the ends of all the earth, far
away into the misty darkness, to the last wave of the Eastern Sea. But
what is doomed must be, and a friend's demand obeyed; for prayers are
the daughters of Zeus, and who honours them honours him."

Then Orpheus rose up sighing, and took his harp, and went over Strymon.
And he led Jason to the southwest, up the banks of Haliacmon and over
the spurs of Pindus, to Dodona the town of Zeus, where it stood by the
side of the sacred lake, and the fountain which breathed out fire, in
the darkness of the ancient oak wood, beneath the mountain of the
hundred springs. And he led him to the holy oak, where the black dove
settled in old times, and was changed into the priestess of Zeus, and
gave oracles to all nations round. And he bade him cut down a bough, and
sacrifice to Hera and to Zeus; and they took the bough and came to
Iolcos, and nailed it to the beak head of the ship.

And at last the ship was finished, and they tried to launch her down the
beach; but she was too heavy for them to move her, and her keel sank
deep in the sand. Then all the heroes looked at each other blushing; but
Jason spoke, and said, "Let us ask the magic bough; perhaps it can help
us in our need."

Then a voice came from the bough, and Jason heard the words it said, and
bade Orpheus play upon the harp, while the heroes waited round, holding
the pine-trunk rollers, to help her toward the sea.

Then Orpheus took his harp, and began his magic song: "How sweet it is
to ride upon the surges, and to leap from wave to wave, while the wind
sings cheerful in the cordage, and the oars flash fast among the foam!
How sweet it is to roam across the ocean, and see new towns and wondrous
lands, and to come home laden with treasure, and to win undying fame!"

And the good ship Argo heard him, and longed to be away and out at sea;
till she stirred in every timber, and heaved from stem to stern, and
leapt up from the sand upon the rollers, and plunged onward like a
gallant horse; and the heroes fed her path with pine trunks, till she
rushed into the whispering sea.

Then they stored her well with food and water, and pulled the ladder up
on board, and settled themselves each man to his oar, and kept time to
Orpheus's harp; and away across the bay they rowed southward, while the
people lined the cliffs; and the women wept while the men shouted, at
the starting of that gallant crew.


PART IV

_How the Argonauts Sailed to Colchis_

And what happened next, my children, whether it be true or not, stands
written in ancient songs, which you shall read for yourselves some day.
And grand old songs they are, written in grand old rolling verse; and
they call them the Songs of Orpheus, or the Orphics, to this day. And
they tell how the heroes came to Aphetai, across the bay, and waited for
the southwest wind, and chose themselves a captain from their crew: and
how all called for Heracles, because he was the strongest and most huge;
but Heracles refused, and called for Jason, because he was the wisest of
them all. So Jason was chosen captain: and Orpheus heaped a pile of wood
and slew a bull, and offered it to Hera, and called all the heroes to
stand round, each man's head crowned with olive, and to strike their
swords into the bull. Then he filled a golden goblet with the bull's
blood, and with wheaten flour, and honey, and wine, and the bitter salt
sea water, and bade the heroes taste. So each tasted the goblet, and
passed it round, and vowed an awful vow; and they vowed before the sun,
and the night, and the blue-haired sea who shakes the land, to stand by
Jason faithfully, in the adventure of the golden fleece; and whosoever
shrank back, or disobeyed, or turned traitor to his vow, then justice
should witness against him, and the Erinnes who track guilty men.

Then Jason lighted the pile, and burnt the carcass of the bull; and they
went to their ship and sailed eastward, like men who have a work to do;
and the place from which they went was called Aphetai, the sailing
place, from that day forth. Three thousand years ago and more they
sailed away, into the unknown Eastern seas; and great nations have come
and gone since then, and many a storm has swept the earth; and many a
mighty armament, to which Argo would be but one small boat, have sailed
those waters since; yet the fame of that small Argo lives forever, and
her name is become a proverb among men.

So they sailed past the Isle of Sciathos, with the Cape of Sepius on
their left, and turned to the northward toward Pelion, up the long
Magnesian shore. On their right hand was the open sea, and on their left
old Pelion rose, while the clouds crawled round his dark pine forests,
and his caps of summer snow. And their hearts yearned for the dear old
mountain, as they thought of pleasant days gone by, and of the sports of
their boyhood, and their hunting, and their schooling in the cave
beneath the cliff. And at last Peleus spoke: "Let us land here, friends,
and climb the dear old hill once more. We are going on a fearful
journey: who knows if we shall see Pelion again? Let us go up to Cheiron
our master, and ask his blessing ere we start. And I have a boy, too,
with him, whom he trains as he trained me once, the son whom Thetis
brought me, the silver-footed lady of the sea, whom I caught in the
cave, and tamed her though she changed her shape seven times. For she
changed, as I held her, into water, and to vapour, and to burning flame,
and to a rock, and to a black-maned lion, and to a tall and stately
tree. But I held her and held her ever till she took her own shape
again, and led her to my father's house, and won her for my bride. And
all the rulers of Olympus came to our wedding, and the heavens and the
earth rejoiced together, when an immortal wedded mortal man. And now let
me see my son; for it is not often I shall see him upon earth; famous he
will be, but short lived, and die in the flower of youth."

So Tiphys, the helmsman, steered them to the shore under the crags of
Pelion; and they went up through the dark pine forests toward the
Centaur's cave.

And they came into the misty hall, beneath the snow-crowned crag; and
saw the great Centaur lying with his huge limbs spread upon the rock;
and beside him stood Achilles, the child whom no steel could wound, and
played upon his harp right sweetly, while Cheiron watched and smiled.

Then Cheiron leapt up and welcomed them, and kissed them every one, and
set a feast before them, of swine's flesh, and venison, and good wine;
and young Achilles served them, and carried the golden goblet round. And
after supper all the heroes clapped their hands, and called on Orpheus
to sing; but he refused, and said, "How can I, who am the younger, sing
before our ancient host?" So they called on Cheiron to sing, and
Achilles brought him his harp; and he began a wondrous song; a famous
story of old time, of the fight between Centaurs and the Lapithai, which
you may still see carved in stone. He sang how his brothers came to ruin
by their folly, when they were mad with wine; and how they and the
heroes fought, with fists, and teeth, and the goblets from which they
drank; and how they tore up the pine trees in their fury, and hurled
great crags of stone, while the mountains thundered with the battle, and
the land was wasted far and wide; till the Lapithai drove them from
their home in the rich Thessalian plains to the lonely glens of Pindus,
leaving Cheiron all alone. And the heroes praised his song right
heartily; for some of them had helped in that great fight.

Then Orpheus took the lyre, and sang of Chaos, and the making of the
wondrous World, and how all things sprang from Love, who could not live
alone in the Abyss. And as he sang, his voice rose from the cave, above
the crags, and through the tree tops, and the glens of oak and pine. And
the trees bowed their heads when they heard it, and the gray rocks
cracked and rang, and the forest beasts crept near to listen, and the
birds forsook their nests and hovered round. And old Cheiron clapt his
hands together, and beat his hoofs upon the ground, for wonder at that
magic song.

Then Peleus kissed his boy, and wept over him, and they went down to the
ship; and Cheiron came down with them, weeping, and kissed them one by
one, and blest them, and promised to them great renown. And the heroes
wept when they left him, till their great hearts could weep no more; for
he was kind and just and pious, and wiser than all beasts and men. Then
he went up to a cliff, and prayed for them, that they might come home
safe and well; while the heroes rowed away, and watched him standing on
his cliff above the sea, with his great hands raised toward heaven, and
his white locks waving in the wind; and they strained their eyes to
watch him to the last, for they felt that they should look on him no
more.

So they rowed on over the long swell of the sea, past Olympus, the seat
of die immortals, and past the wooded bays of Athos, and Samothrace, the
sacred isle; and they came past Lemnos to the Hellespont, and through
the narrow strait of Abydos, and so on into the Propontis, which we call
Marmora now. And there they met with Cyzicus, ruling in Asia over the
Dolions, who, the songs say, was the son of AEneas, of whom you will hear
many a tale some day. For Homer tells us how he fought at Troy; and
Virgil how he sailed away and founded Rome; and men believed until late
years that from him sprang the old British kings. Now Cyzicus, the songs
say, welcomed the heroes; for his father had been one of Cheiron's
scholars; so he welcomed them, and feasted them, and stored their ship
with corn and wine, and cloaks and rugs, the songs say, and shirts, of
which no doubt they stood in need.

But at night, while they lay sleeping, came down on them terrible men,
who lived with the bears in the mountains, like Titans or giants in
shape; for each of them had six arms, and they fought with young firs
and pines. But Heracles killed them all before morn with his deadly
poisoned arrows; but among them, in the darkness, he slew Cyzicus the
kindly prince.

Then they got to their ship and to their oars, and Tiphys bade them cast
off the hawsers, and go to sea. But as he spoke a whirlwind came, and
spun the Argo round, and twisted the hawsers together, so that no man
could loose them. Then Tiphys dropped the rudder from his hand, and
cried, "This comes from the Gods above." But Jason went forward, and
asked counsel of the magic bough.

Then the magic bough spoke and answered: "This is because you have
slain Cyzicus your friend. You must appease his soul, or you will never
leave this shore."

Jason went back sadly, and told the heroes what he had heard. And they
leapt on shore, and searched till dawn; and at dawn they found the body,
all rolled in dust and blood, among the corpses of those monstrous
beasts. And they wept over their kind host, and laid him on a fair bed,
and heaped a huge mound over him, and offered black sheep at his tomb,
and Orpheus sang a magic song to him, that his spirit might have rest.
And then they held games at the tomb, after the custom of those times,
and Jason gave prizes to each winner. To Ancæus he gave a golden cup,
for he wrestled best of all; and to Heracles a silver one, for he was
the strongest of all; and to Castor, who rode best, a golden crest; and
Polydeuces the boxer had a rich carpet, and to Orpheus for his song, a
sandal with golden wings. But Jason himself was the best of all the
archers, and the Minuai crowned him with an olive crown; and so, the
songs say, the soul of good Cyzicus was appeased, and the heroes went on
their way in peace.

But when Cyzicus's wife heard that he was dead, she died likewise of
grief; and her tears became a fountain of clear water, which flows the
whole year round.

Then they rowed away, the songs say, along the Mysian shore, and past
the mouth of Rhindacus, till they found a pleasant bay, sheltered by the
long ridges of Arganthus, and by high walls of basalt rock. And there
they ran the ship ashore upon the yellow sand, and furled the sail, and
took the mast down, and lashed it in its crutch. And next they let down
the ladder, and went ashore to sport and rest.

And there Heracles went away into the woods, bow in hand, to hunt wild
deer; and Hylas the fair boy slipt away after him, and followed him by
stealth, until he lost himself among the glens, and sat down weary to
rest himself by the side of a lake; and there the water nymphs came up
to look at him, and loved him, and carried him down under the lake to be
their playfellow, forever happy and young. And Heracles sought for him
in vain, shouting his name till all the mountains rang; but Hylas never
heard him, far down under the sparkling lake. So while Heracles wandered
searching for him, a fair breeze sprang up, and Heracles was nowhere to
be found; and the Argo sailed away, and Heracles was left behind, and
never saw the noble Phasian stream.

Then the Minuai came to a doleful land, where Amycus the giant ruled,
and cared nothing for the laws of Zeus, but challenged all strangers to
box with him, and those whom he conquered he slew. But Polydeuces the
boxer struck him a harder blow than he ever felt before, and slew him;
and the Minuai went on up the Bosphorus, till they came to the city of
Phineus, the fierce Bithynian king; for Zetes and Calais bade Jason land
there, because they had a work to do.

And they went up from the shore toward the city, through forests white
with snow; and Phineus came out to meet them with a lean and woeful
face, and said, "Welcome, gallant heroes, to the land of bitter blasts,
a land of cold and misery; yet I will feast you as best I can." And he
led them in, and set meat before them; but before they could put their
hands to their mouths, down came two fearful monsters, the like of whom
man never saw; for they had the faces and the hair of fair maidens, but
the wings and claws of hawks; and they snatched the meat from off the
table, and flew shrieking out above the roofs.

Then Phineus beat his breast and cried, "These are the Harpies, whose
names are the Whirlwind and the Swift, the daughters of Wonder and of
the Amber nymph, and they rob us night and day. They carried off the
daughters of Pandareus, whom all the Gods had blest; for Aphrodite fed
them on Olympus with honey and milk and wine; and Hera gave them beauty
and wisdom, and Athene skill in all the arts; but when they came to
their wedding, the Harpies snatched them both away, and gave them to be
slaves to the Erinnues, and live in horror all their days. And now they
haunt me, and my people, and the Bosphorus, with fearful storms; and
sweep away our food from off our tables, so that we starve in spite of
all our wealth."

Then up rose Zetes and Calais, the winged sons of the North wind, and
said, "Do you not know us, Phineus, and these wings which grow upon our
backs?" And Phineus hid his face in terror; but he answered not a word.

"Because you have been a traitor, Phineus, the Harpies haunt you night
and day. Where is Cleopatra our sister, your wife, whom you keep in
prison? and where are her two children, whom you blinded in your rage,
at the bidding of an evil woman, and cast them out upon the rocks? Swear
to us that you will right our sister, and cast out that wicked woman;
and then we will free you from your plague, and drive the whirlwind
maidens from the south; but if not, we will put out your eyes, as you
put out the eyes of your own sons."

Then Phineus swore an oath to them, and drove out the wicked woman; and
Jason took those two poor children, and cured their eyes with magic
herbs.

But Zetes and Calais rose up sadly; and said: "Farewell now, heroes
all; farewell, our dear companions, with whom we played on Pelion in old
times; for a fate is laid upon us, and our day is come at last, in which
we may hunt the whirlwinds, over land and sea forever; and if we catch
them they die, and if not, we die ourselves."

At that all the heroes wept; but the two young men sprang up, and aloft
into the air after the Harpies, and the battle of the winds began.

The heroes trembled in silence as they heard the shrieking of the
blasts; while the palace rocked and all the city, and great stones were
torn from the crags, and the forest pines were hurled eastward, north
and south and east and west, and the Bosphorus boiled white with foam,
and the clouds were dashed against the cliffs.

But at last the battle ended, and the Harpies fled screaming toward the
south, and the sons of the North wind rushed after them, and brought
clear sunshine where they passed. For many a league they followed them,
over all the isles of the Cyclades, and away to the southwest across
Hellas, till they came to the Ionian Sea, and there they fell upon the
Echinades, at the mouth of the Achelous; and those isles were called the
Whirlwind Isles for many a hundred years. But what became of Zetes and
Calais I know not; for the heroes never saw them again; and some say
that Heracles met them, and quarrelled with them, and slew them with his
arrows; and some say that they fell down from weariness and the heat of
the summer sun, and that the Sun god buried them among the Cyclades, in
the pleasant Isle of Tenos; and for many hundred years their grave was
shown there, and over it a pillar, which turned to every wind. But those
dark storms and whirlwinds haunt the Bosphorus until this day.

But the Argonauts went eastward, and out into the open sea, which we now
call the Black Sea, but it was called the Euxine then. No Hellen had
ever crossed it, and all feared that dreadful sea, and its rocks, and
shoals, and fogs, and bitter freezing storms; and they told strange
stories of it, some false and some half true, how it stretched northward
to the ends of the earth, and the sluggish Putrid Sea, and the
everlasting night, and the regions of the dead. So the heroes trembled,
for all their courage, as they came into that wild Black Sea, and saw it
stretching out before them, without a shore, as far as eye could see.

And first Orpheus spoke, and warned them: "We shall come now to the
wandering blue rocks; my mother warned me of them, Calliope, the
immortal muse."

And soon they saw the blue rocks shining, like spires and castles of
gray glass, while an ice-cold wind blew from them, and chilled all the
heroes' hearts. And as they neared, they could see them heaving, as they
rolled upon the long sea waves, crashing and grinding together, till the
roar went up to heaven. The sea sprang up in spouts between them, and
swept round them in white sheets of foam; but their heads swung nodding
high in air, while the wind whistled shrill among the crags.

The heroes' hearts sank within them, and they lay upon their oars in
fear; but Orpheus called to Tiphys the helmsman: "Between them we must
pass; so look ahead for an opening, and be brave, for Hera is with us."
But Tiphys the cunning helmsman stood silent, clenching his teeth, till
he saw a heron come flying mast high toward the rocks, and hover awhile
before them, as if looking for a passage through. Then he cried, "Hera
has sent us a pilot; let us follow the cunning bird."

Then the heron flapped to and fro a moment, till he saw a hidden gap,
and into it he rushed like an arrow, while the heroes watched what would
befall.

And the blue rocks clashed together as the bird fled swiftly through;
but they struck but a feather from his tail, and then rebounded apart at
the shock.

Then Tiphys cheered the heroes, and they shouted; and the oars bent like
withes beneath their strokes, as they rushed between those toppling ice
crags, and the cold blue lips of death. And ere the rocks could meet
again they had passed them, and were safe out in the open sea.

And after that they sailed on wearily along the Asian coast, by the
Black Cape and Thyneis, where the hot stream of Thymbris falls into the
sea, and Sangarius, whose waters float on the Euxine, till they came to
Wolf the river, and to Wolf the kindly king. And there died two brave
heroes, Idmon and Tiphys the wise helmsman; one died of an evil
sickness, and one a wild boar slew. So the heroes heaped a mound above
them, and set upon it an oar on high, and left them there to sleep
together, on the far-off Lycian shore. But Idas killed the boar, and
avenged Tiphys; and Ancaios took the rudder and was helmsman, and
steered them on toward the east.

And they went on past Sinope, and many a mighty river's mouth, and past
many a barbarous tribe, and the cities of the Amazons, the warlike women
of the East, till all night they heard the clank of anvils and the roar
of furnace blasts, and the forge fires shone like sparks through the
darkness, in the mountain glens aloft; for they were come to the shores
of the Chalybes, the smiths who never tire, but serve Ares the cruel War
god, forging weapons day and night.

And at day dawn they looked eastward, and midway between the sea and the
sky they saw white snow peaks hanging glittering sharp and bright above
the clouds. And they knew that they were come to Caucasus, at the end of
all the earth; Caucasus the highest of all mountains, the father of the
rivers of the East. On his peak lies chained the Titan, while a vulture
tears his heart; and at his feet are piled dark forests round the magic
Colchian land.

And they rowed three days to the eastward, while Caucasus rose higher
hour by hour, till they saw the dark stream of Phasis rushing headlong
to the sea, and shining above the treetops, the golden roofs of King
Aietes, the child of the sun.

Then out spoke Ancaios the helmsman: "We are come to our goal at last;
for there are the roofs of Aietes, and the woods where all poisons grow;
but who can tell us where among them is hid the golden fleece? Many a
toil must we bear ere we find it, and bring it home to Greece."

But Jason cheered the heroes, for his heart was high and bold; and he
said: "I will go alone up to Aietes, though he be the child of the sun,
and win him with soft words. Better so than to go altogether, and to
come to blows at once." But the Minuai would not stay behind, so they
rowed boldly up the stream.

And a dream came to Aietes, and filled his heart with fear. He thought
he saw a shining star, which fell into his daughter's lap; and that
Medeia his daughter took it gladly, and carried it to the river side,
and cast it in, and there the whirling river bore it down, and out into
the Euxine Sea.

Then he leapt up in fear, and bade his servants bring his chariot, that
he might go down to the riverside and appease the nymphs, and the heroes
whose spirits haunt the bank. So he went down in his golden chariot, and
his daughters by his side, Medeia the fair witch maiden, and Chalciope,
who had been Phrixus's wife, and behind him a crowd of servants and
soldiers, for he was a rich and mighty prince.

And as he drove down by the reedy river, he saw Argo sliding up beneath
the bank, and many a hero in her, like immortals for beauty and for
strength, as their weapons glittered round them in the level morning
sunlight, through the white mist of the stream. But Jason was the
noblest of all; for Hera who loved him gave him beauty, and tallness,
and terrible manhood.

And when they came near together and looked into each other's eyes, the
heroes were awed before Aietes as he shone in his chariot, like his
father the glorious Sun; for his robes were of rich gold tissue, and the
rays of his diadem flashed fire; and in his hand he bore a jewelled
sceptre, which glittered like the stars; and sternly he looked at them
under his brows, and sternly he spoke and loud:

"Who are you, and what want you here, that you come to the shore of
Cutaia? Do you take no account of my rule, nor of my people the
Colchians who serve me, who never tired yet in the battle, and know well
how to face an invader?"

And the heroes sat silent awhile before the face of that ancient king.
But Hera the awful goddess put courage into Jason's heart, and he rose
and shouted loudly in answer: "We are no pirates, nor lawless men. We
come not to plunder and to ravage, or carry away slaves from your land;
but my uncle, the son of Poseidon, Pelias the Minuan king, he it is who
has set me on a quest to bring home the golden fleece. And these, too,
my bold comrades, they are no nameless men; for some are the sons of
immortals, and some of heroes far renowned. And we, too, never tire in
battle, and know well how to give blows and to take; yet we wish to be
guests at your table; it will be better so for both."

Then Aietes's rage rushed up like a whirlwind, and his eyes flashed fire
as he heard; but he crushed his anger down in his breast, and spoke
mildly a cunning speech:

"If you will fight for the fleece with my Colchians, then many a man
must die. But do you indeed expect to win from me the fleece in fight?
So few you are, that if you be worsted, I can load your ship with your
corpses. But if you will be ruled by me, you will find it better far to
choose the best man among you, and let him fulfil the labours which I
demand. Then I will give him the golden fleece for a prize and a glory
to you all."

So saying, he turned his horses and drove back in silence to the town.
And the Minuai sat silent with sorrow, and longed for Heracles and his
strength; for there was no facing the thousands of the Colchians, and
the fearful chance of war.

But Chalciope, Phrixus's widow, went weeping to the town; for she
remembered her Minuan husband, and all the pleasures of her youth, while
she watched the fair faces of his kinsmen, and their long locks of
golden hair. And she whispered to Medeia her sister: "Why should all
these brave men die? why does not my father give them up the fleece,
that my husband's spirit may have rest?"

And Medeia's heart pitied the heroes, and Jason most of all; and she
answered, "Our father is stern and terrible, and who can win the golden
fleece?" But Chalciope said: "These men are not like our men; there is
nothing which they cannot dare nor do."

And Medeia thought of Jason and his brave countenance, and said: "If
there was one among them who knew no fear, I could show him how to win
the fleece."

So in the dusk of evening they went down to the riverside, Chalciope and
Medeia the witch maiden, and Argus, Phrixus's son. And Argus the boy
crept forward, among the beds of reeds, till he came where the heroes
were sleeping, on the thwarts of the ship, beneath the bank, while Jason
kept ward on shore, and leant upon his lance full of thought. And the
boy came to Jason, and said:

"I am the son of Phrixus, your cousin; and Chalciope my mother waits for
you, to talk about the golden fleece."

Then Jason went boldly with the boy, and found the two princesses
standing; and when Chalciope saw him she wept, and took his hands, and
cried:

"O cousin of my beloved, go home before you die!"

"It would be base to go home now, fair princess, and to have sailed all
these seas in vain." Then both the princesses besought him: but Jason
said, "It is too late."

"But you know not," said Medeia, "what he must do who would win the
fleece. He must tame the two brazen-footed bulls, who breathe devouring
flame; and with them he must plough ere nightfall four acres in the
field of Ares; and he must sow them with serpents' teeth, of which each
tooth springs up into an armed man. Then he must fight with all those
warriors; and little will it profit him to conquer them; for the fleece
is guarded by a serpent, more huge than any mountain pine; and over his
body you must step, if you would reach the golden fleece."

Then Jason laughed bitterly. "Unjustly is that fleece kept here, and by
an unjust and lawless king; and unjustly shall I die in my youth, for I
will attempt it ere another sun be set."

Then Medeia trembled, and said: "No mortal man can reach that fleece,
unless I guide him through. For round it, beyond the river, is a wall
full nine ells high, with lofty towers and buttresses, and mighty gates
of threefold brass; and over the gates the wall is arched, with golden
battlements above. And over the gateway sits Brimo, the wild witch
huntress of the woods, brandishing a pine torch in her hands, while her
mad hounds howl around. No man dare meet her or look on her, but only I
her priestess, and she watches far and wide lest any stranger should
come near."

"No wall so high but it may be climbed at last, and no wood so thick but
it may be crawled through; no serpent so wary but he may be charmed, or
witch queen so fierce but spells may soothe her; and I may yet win the
golden fleece, if a wise maiden help bold men."

And he looked at Medeia cunningly, and held her with his glittering eye,
till she blushed and trembled, and said:

"Who can face the fire of the bulls' breath, and fight ten thousand
armed men?"

"He whom you help," said Jason, flattering her, "for your fame is spread
over all the earth. Are you not the queen of all enchantresses, wiser
even than your sister Circe, in her fairy island in the West?"

"Would that I were with my sister Circe in her fairy island in the West,
far away from sore temptation, and thoughts which tear the heart! But
if it must be so--for why should you die?--I have an ointment here; I
made it from the magic ice flower which sprang from Prometheus's wound,
above the clouds on Caucasus, in the dreary fields of snow. Anoint
yourself with that, and you shall have in you seven men's strength; and
anoint your shield with it, and neither fire nor sword can harm you. But
what you begin you must end before sunset, for its virtue lasts only one
day. And anoint your helmet with it before you sow the serpents' teeth;
and when the sons of earth spring up, cast your helmet among their
ranks, and the deadly crop of the War-god's field will mow itself, and
perish."

Then Jason fell on his knees before her, and thanked her and kissed her
hands; and she gave him the vase of ointment, and fled trembling through
the reeds. And Jason told his comrades what had happened, and showed
them the box of ointment; and all rejoiced but Idas and he grew mad with
envy.

And at sunrise Jason went and bathed, and anointed himself from head to
foot, and his shield, and his helmet, and his weapons, and bade his
comrades try the spell. So they tried to bend his lance, but it stood
like an iron bar; and Idas in spite hewed at it with his sword, but the
blade flew to splinters in his face. Then they hurled their lances at
his shield, but the spear points turned like lead; and Caineus tried to
throw him, but he never stirred a foot; and Polydeuces struck him with
his fist a blow which would have killed an ox; but Jason only smiled,
and the heroes danced about him with delight; and he leapt and ran, and
shouted, in the joy of that enormous strength, till the sun rose, and it
was time to go and to claim Aietes's promise.

So he sent up Telamon and Aithalides to tell Aietes that he was ready
for the fight; and they went up among the marble walls, and beneath the
roofs of gold, and stood in Aietes's hall, while he grew pale with rage.

"Fulfil your promise to us, child of the blazing sun. Give us the
serpents' teeth, and let loose the fiery bulls; for we have found a
champion among us who can win the golden fleece."

And Aietes bit his lips, for he fancied that they had fled away by
night; but he could not go back from his promise; so he gave them the
serpents' teeth.

Then he called for his chariot and his horses, and sent heralds through
all the town; and all the people went out with him to the dreadful
War-god's field.

And there Aietes sat upon his throne, with his warriors on each hand,
thousands and tens of thousands, clothed from head to foot in
steel-chain mail. And the people and the women crowded to every window,
and bank and wall; while the Minuai stood together, a mere handful in
the midst of that great host.

And Chalciope was there and Argus, trembling, and Medeia, wrapped
closely in her veil; but Aietes did not know that she was muttering
cunning spells between her lips.

Then Jason cried, "Fulfil your promise, and let your fiery bulls come
forth."

Then Aietes bade open the gates, and the magic bulls leapt out. Their
brazen hoofs rang upon the ground, and their nostrils sent out sheets of
flame, as they rushed with lowered heads upon Jason; but he never
flinched a step. The flame of their breath swept round him, but it
singed not a hair of his head; and the bulls stopped short and trembled,
when Medeia began her spell.

Then Jason sprang upon the nearest, and seized him by the horn; and up
and down they wrestled, till the bull fell grovelling on his knees; for
the heart of the brute died within him, and his mighty limbs were loosed
beneath the steadfast eye of that dark witch maiden, and the magic
whisper of her lips.

So both the bulls were tamed and yoked; and Jason bound them to the
plough, and goaded them onward with his lance, till he had ploughed the
sacred field.

And all the Minuai shouted; but Aietes bit his lips with rage; for the
half of Jason's work was over, and the sun was yet high in heaven.

Then he took the serpents' teeth and sowed them, and waited what would
befall. But Medeia looked at him and at his helmet, lest he should
forget the lesson she had taught.

And every furrow heaved and bubbled, and out of every clod rose a man.
Out of the earth they rose by thousands, each clad from head to foot in
steel, and drew their swords and rushed on Jason, where he stood in the
midst alone. Then the Minuai grew pale with fear for him; but Aietes
laughed a bitter laugh. "See! if I had not warriors enough already round
me, I could call them out of the bosom of the earth."

But Jason snatched off his helmet, and hurled it into the thickest of
the throng. And blind madness came upon them, suspicion, hate, and fear;
and one cried to his fellow, "Thou didst strike me!" and another, "Thou
art Jason; thou shalt die!" So fury seized those earth-born phantoms,
and each turned his hand against the rest; and they fought and were
never weary, till they all lay dead upon the ground. Then the magic
furrows opened, and the kind earth took them home into her breast; and
the grass grew up all green again above them, and Jason's work was done.

Then the Minuai rose and shouted, till Prometheus heard them from his
crag. And Jason cried: "Lead me to the fleece this moment, before the
sun goes down."

But Aietes thought: "He has conquered the bulls; and sown and reaped the
deadly crop. Who is this who is proof against all magic? He may kill the
serpent yet." So he delayed, and sat taking counsel with his princes,
till the sun went down and all was dark. Then he bade a herald cry,
"Every man to his home for to-night. To-morrow we will meet these
heroes, and speak about the golden fleece."

Then he turned and looked at Medeia: "This is your doing, false witch
maid! You have helped these yellow-haired strangers, and brought shame
upon your father and yourself!"

Medeia shrank and trembled, and her face grew pale with fear; and Aietes
knew that she was guilty, and whispered, "If they win the fleece, you
die!"

But the Minuai marched toward their ship, growling like lions cheated of
their prey; for they saw that Aietes meant to mock them, and to cheat
them out of all their toil. And Oileus said, "Let us go to the grove
together, and take the fleece by force."

And Idas the rash cried, "Let us draw lots who shall go in first; for
while the dragon is devouring one, the rest can slay him, and carry off
the fleece in peace." But Jason held them back, though he praised them;
for he hoped for Medeia's help.

And after awhile Medeia came trembling, and wept a long while before she
spoke. And at last:

"My end is come, and I must die; for my father has found out that I
have helped you. You he would kill if he dared; but he will not harm
you, because you have been his guests. Go then, go, and remember poor
Medeia when you are far away across the sea." But all the heroes cried:

"If you die, we die with you; for without you we cannot win the fleece,
and home we will not go without it, but fall here fighting to the last
man."

"You need not die," said Jason. "Flee home with us across the sea. Show
us first how to win the fleece; for you can do it. Why else are you the
priestess of the grove? Show us but how to win the fleece, and come with
us, and you shall be my queen, and rule over the rich princes of the
Minuai, in Iolcos by the sea."

And all the heroes pressed round, and vowed to her that she should be
their queen.

Medeia wept, and shuddered, and hid her face in her hands; for her heart
yearned after her sisters and her playfellows, and the home where she
was brought up as a child. But at last she looked up at Jason, and spoke
between her sobs:

"Must I leave my home and my people, to wander with strangers across the
sea? The lot is cast, and I must endure it. I will show you how to win
the golden fleece. Bring up your ship to the woodside, and moor her
there against the bank and let Jason come up at midnight, and one brave
comrade with him, and meet me beneath the wall."

Then all the heroes cried together: "I will go!" "and I!" "and I!" And
Idas the rash grew mad with envy; for he longed to be foremost in all
things. But Medeia calmed them, and said: "Orpheus shall go with Jason,
and bring his magic harp; for I hear of him that he is the king of all
minstrels, and can charm all things on earth."

And Orpheus laughed for joy, and clapped his hands, because the choice
had fallen on him; for in those days poets and singers were as bold
warriors as the best.

So at midnight they went up the bank, and found Medeia; and beside came
Absyrtus her young brother, leading a yearling lamb.

Then Medeia brought them to a thicket, beside the War-god's gate; and
there she bade Jason dig a ditch, and kill the lamb and leave it there,
and strew on it magic herbs and honey from the honeycomb.

Then sprang up through the earth, with the red fire flashing before her,
Brimo the wild witch huntress, while her mad hounds howled around. She
had one head like a horse's, and another like a ravening hound's, and
another like a hissing snake's, and a sword in either hand. And she
leapt into the ditch with her hounds, and they ate and drank their fill,
while Jason and Orpheus trembled, and Medeia hid her eyes. And at last
the witch queen vanished, and fled with her hounds into the woods; and
the bars of the gates fell down, and the brazen doors flew wide, and
Medeia and the heroes ran forward and hurried through the poison wood,
among the dark stems of the mighty beeches, guided by the gleam of the
golden fleece, until they saw it hanging on one vast tree in the midst.
And Jason would have sprung to seize it; but Medeia held him back, and
pointed shuddering to the tree foot, where the mighty serpent lay,
coiled in and out among the roots, with a body like a mountain pine. His
coils stretched many a fathom, spangled with bronze and gold; and half
of him they could see, but no more; for the rest lay in the darkness
far beyond.

And when he saw them coming, he lifted up his head, and watched them
with his small bright eyes, and flashed his forked tongue, and roared
like the fire among the woodlands, till the forest tossed and groaned.
For his cry shook the trees from leaf to root, and swept over the long
reaches of the river, and over AEetes's hall, and woke the sleepers in
the city, till mothers clasped their children in their fear.

But Medeia called gently to him; and he stretched out his long spotted
neck, and licked her hand, and looked up in her face, as if to ask for
food. Then she made a sign to Orpheus, and he began his magic song.

And as he sung, the forest grew calm again, and the leaves on every tree
hung still; and the serpent's head sank down, and his brazen coils grew
limp, and his glittering eyes closed lazily, till he breathed as gently
as a child, while Orpheus called to pleasant Slumber, who gives peace to
men, and beasts, and waves.

Then Jason leapt forward warily, and stept across that mighty snake, and
tore the fleece from off the tree trunk; and the four rushed down the
garden, to the bank where the Argo lay.

There was a silence for a moment, while Jason held the golden fleece on
high. Then he cried: "Go now, good Argo, swift and steady, if ever you
would see Pelion more."

And she went, as the heroes drove her, grim and silent all, with muffled
oars, till the pine wood bent like willow in their hands, and stout Argo
groaned beneath their strokes.

On and on, beneath the dewy darkness, they fled swiftly down the
swirling stream; underneath black walls, and temples, and the castles of
the princes of the East; past sluice mouths, and fragrant gardens, and
groves of all strange fruits; past marshes where fat kine lay sleeping,
and long beds of whispering reeds; till they heard the merry music of
the surge upon the bar, as it tumbled in the moonlight all alone.

Into the surge they rushed, and Argo leapt the breakers like a horse;
for she knew the time was come to show her mettle, and win honour for
the heroes and herself.

Into the surge they rushed, and Argo leapt the breakers like a horse,
till the heroes stopped all panting, each man upon his oar, as she slid
into the still broad sea.

Then Orpheus took his harp and sang a pæan, till the heroes' hearts rose
high again; and they rowed on stoutly and steadfastly, away into the
darkness of the West.


PART V

_How the Argonauts Were Driven into the Unknown Sea_

So they fled away in haste to the westward: but Aietes manned his fleet
and followed them. And Lynceus the quick eyed saw him coming, while he
was still many a mile away, and cried: "I see a hundred ships, like a
flock of white swans, far in the east." And at that they rowed hard,
like heroes; but the ships came nearer every hour.

Then Medeia, the dark witch maiden, laid a cruel and a cunning plot; for
she killed Absyrtus her young brother, and cast him into the sea, and
said: "Ere my father can take up his corpse and bury it, he must wait
long, and be left far behind."

And all the heroes shuddered, and looked one at the other for shame; yet
they did not punish that dark witch woman, because she had won for them
the golden fleece.

And when Aietes came to the place, he saw the floating corpse; and he
stopped a long while, and bewailed his son, and took him up, and went
home. But he sent on his sailors toward the westward, and bound them by
a mighty curse: "Bring back to me that dark witch woman, that she may
die a dreadful death. But if you return without her, you shall die by
the same death yourselves."

So the Argonauts escaped for that time; but Father Zeus saw that foul
crime; and out of the heavens he sent a storm, and swept the ship far
from her course. Day after day the storm drove her, amid foam and
blinding mist, till they knew no longer where they were, for the sun was
blotted from the skies. And at last the ship struck on a shoal, amid low
isles of mud and sand, and the waves rolled over her and through her,
and the heroes lost all hope of life.

Then Jason cried to Hera: "Fair queen, who hast befriended us till now,
why hast thou left us in our misery, to die here among unknown seas? It
is hard to lose the honour which we have won with such toil and danger,
and hard never to see Hellas again, and the pleasant bay of Pagasai."

Then out and spoke the magic bough which stood upon the Argo's beak:
"Because Father Zeus is angry, all this has fallen on you; for a cruel
crime has been done on board, and the sacred ship is foul with blood."

At that some of the heroes cried: "Medeia is the murderess. Let the
witch woman bear her sin, and die!"

And they seized Medeia, to hurl her into the sea and atone for the young
boy's death; but the magic bough spoke again: "Let her live till her
crimes are full. Vengeance waits for her, slow and sure; but she must
live, for you need her still. She must show you the way to her sister
Circe, who lives among the islands of the West. To her you must sail, a
weary way, and she shall cleanse you from your guilt."

Then all the heroes wept aloud when they heard the sentence of the oak;
for they knew that a dark journey lay before them, and years of bitter
toil. And some upbraided the dark witch woman, and some said: "Nay, we
are her debtors still; without her we should never have won the fleece."
But most of them bit their lips in silence, for they feared the witch's
spells.

And now the sea grew calmer, and the sun shone out once more, and the
heroes thrust the ship off the sand bank, and rowed forward on their
weary course, under the guiding of the dark witch maiden, into the
wastes of the unknown sea.

Whither they went I cannot tell, nor how they came to Circe's isle. Some
say that they went to the westward, and up the Ister[A] stream, and so
came into the Adriatic, dragging their ship over the snowy Alps. And
others say that they went southward, into the Red Indian Sea, and past
the sunny lands where spices grow, round AEthiopia toward the west; and
that at last they came to Libya, and dragged their ship across the
burning sands, and over the hills into the Syrtes, where the flats and
quicksands spread for many a mile, between rich Cyrene and the
Lotus-eaters' shore. But all these are but dreams and fables, and dim
hints of unknown lands.



But all say that they came to a place where they had to drag their ship
across the land nine days with ropes and rollers, till they came into an
unknown sea. And the best of all the old songs tells us, how they went
away toward the north, till they came to the slope of Caucasus, where it
sinks into the sea; and to the narrow Cimmerian Bosphorus,[A] where the
Titan swam across upon the bull; and thence into the lazy waters of the
still Mæotid Lake.[B] And thence they went northward ever, up the
Tanais, which we call Don, past the Geloni and Sauromatai, and many a
wandering shepherd tribe, and the one-eyed Arimaspi, of whom old Greek
poets tell, who steal the gold from the Griffins, in the cold
Rhiphaian[C] hills.

And they passed the Scythian archers, and the Tauri who eat men, and the
wandering Hyperboreai, who feed their flocks beneath the pole star,
until they came into the northern ocean, the dull dead Cronian Sea.[D]
And there Argo would move on no longer; and each man clasped his elbow,
and leaned his head upon his hand, heartbroken with toil and hunger, and
gave himself up to death. But brave Ancaios the helmsman cheered up
their hearts once more, and bade them leap on land, and haul the ship
with ropes and rollers for many a weary day, whether over land, or mud,
or ice, I know not, for the song is mixed and broken like a dream. And
it says next, how they came to the rich nation of the famous long-lived
men; and to the coast of the Cimmerians, who never saw the sun, buried
deep in the glens of the snow mountains; and to the fair land of
Hermione, where dwelt the most righteous of all nations; and to the
gates of the world below, and to the dwelling place of dreams.









And at last Ancaios shouted: "Endure a little while, brave friends, the
worst is surely past; for I can see the pure west wind ruffle the water,
and hear the roar of ocean on the sands. So raise up the mast, and set
the sail, and face what comes like men."

Then out spoke the magic bough: "Ah, would that I had perished long ago,
and been whelmed by the dread blue rocks, beneath the fierce swell of
the Euxine! Better so, than to wander forever, disgraced by the guilt of
my princes; for the blood of Absyrtus still tracks me, and woe follows
hard upon woe. And now some dark horror will clutch me, if I come near
the Isle of Ierne.[A] Unless you will cling to the land, and sail
southward and southward forever, I shall wander beyond the Atlantic, to
the ocean which has no shore."

Then they blest the magic bough, and sailed southward along the land.
But ere they could pass Ierne, the land of mists and storms, the wild
wind came down, dark and roaring, and caught the sail, and strained the
ropes. And away they drove twelve nights, on the wide wild western sea,
through the foam, and over the rollers, while they saw neither sun nor
stars. And they cried again: "We shall perish, for we know not where we
are. We are lost in the dreary damp darkness, and cannot tell north from
south."

But Lynceus the long sighted called gayly from the bows: "Take heart
again, brave sailors; for I see a pine-clad isle, and the halls of the
kind Earth mother, with a crown of clouds around them."



But Orpheus said: "Turn from them, for no living man can land there:
there is no harbour on the coast, but steep-walled cliffs all round."

So Ancaios turned the ship away; and for three days more they sailed on,
till they came to Aiaia, Circe's home, and the fairy island of the West.

And there Jason bid them land, and seek about for any sign of living
man. And as they went inland, Circe met them, coming down toward the
ship; and they trembled when they saw her; for her hair, and face, and
robes, shone like flame.

And she came and looked at Medeia; and Medeia hid her face beneath her
veil.

And Circe cried, "Ah, wretched girl, have you forgotten all your sins,
that you come hither to my island, where the flowers bloom all the year
round? Where is your aged father, and the brother whom you killed?
Little do I expect you to return in safety with these strangers whom you
love. I will send you food and wine: but your ship must not stay here,
for it is foul with sin, and foul with sin its crew."

And the heroes prayed her, but in vain, and cried, "Cleanse us from our
guilt!" But she sent them away and said, "Go on to Malea, and there you
may be cleansed, and return home."

Then a fair wind rose, and they sailed eastward, by Tartessus on the
Iberian shore, till they came to the Pillars of Hercules, and the
Mediterranean Sea. And thence they sailed on through the deeps of
Sardinia, and past the Ausonian Islands, and the capes of the Tyrrhenian
shore, till they came to a flowery island, upon a still, bright summer's
eve. And as they neared it, slowly and wearily, they heard sweet songs
upon the shore. But when Medeia heard it, she started, and cried:
"Beware, all heroes, for these are the rocks of the Sirens. You must
pass close by them, for there is no other channel; but those who listen
to that song are lost."

Then Orpheus spoke, the king of all minstrels: "Let them match their
song against mine. I have charmed stones, and trees, and dragons, how
much more the hearts of man!" So he caught up his lyre, and stood upon
the poop, and began his magic song.

And now they could see the Sirens, on Anthemousa, the flowery isle;
three fair maidens sitting on the beach, beneath a red rock in the
setting sun, among beds of crimson poppies and golden asphodel. Slowly
they sung and sleepily, with silver voices, mild and clear, which stole
over the golden waters, and into the hearts of all the heroes, in spite
of Orpheus's song.

And all things stayed around and listened; the gulls sat in white lines
along the rocks; on the beach great seals lay basking, and kept time
with lazy heads; while silver shoals of fish came up to hearken, and
whispered as they broke the shining calm. The Wind overhead hushed his
whistling, as he shepherded his clouds toward the west; and the clouds
stood in mid blue, and listened dreaming, like a flock of golden sheep.

And as the heroes listened, the oars fell from their hands, and their
heads drooped on their breasts, and they closed their heavy eyes; and
they dreamed of bright still gardens, and of slumbers under murmuring
pines, till all their toil seemed foolishness, and they thought of their
renown no more.

Then one lifted his head suddenly, and cried, "What use in wandering
forever? Let us stay here and rest awhile." And another, "Let us row to
the shore, and hear the words they sing." And another, "I care not for
the words, but for the music. They shall sing me to sleep, that I may
rest."

And Butes, the son of Pandion, the fairest of all mortal men, leapt out
and swam toward the shore, crying, "I come, I come, fair maidens, to
live and die here, listening to your song."

Then Medeia clapped her hands together, and cried, "Sing louder,
Orpheus, sing a bolder strain; wake up these hapless sluggards, or none
of them will see the land of Hellas more."

Then Orpheus lifted his harp, and crashed his cunning hand across the
strings; and his music and his voice rose like a trumpet through the
still evening air; into the air it rushed like thunder, till the rocks
rang and the sea; and into their souls it rushed like wine, till all
hearts beat fast within their breasts.

And he sung the song of Perseus, how the Gods led him over land and sea,
and how he slew the loathly Gorgon, and won himself a peerless bride;
and how he sits now with the Gods upon Olympus, a shining star in the
sky, immortal with his immortal bride, and honoured by all men below.

So Orpheus sang, and the Sirens, answering each other across the golden
sea, till Orpheus's voice drowned the Sirens, and the heroes caught
their oars again.

And they cried: "We will be men like Perseus, and we will dare and
suffer to the last. Sing us his song again, brave Orpheus, that we may
forget the Sirens and their spell."

And as Orpheus sang, they dashed their oars into the sea, and kept time
to his music, as they fled fast away; and the Sirens' voices died behind
them, in the hissing of the foam along their wake.

But Butes swam to the shore, and knelt down before the Sirens, and
cried, "Sing on! sing on!" But he could say no more; for a charmed sleep
came over him, and a pleasant humming in his ears; and he sank all along
upon the pebbles, and forgot all heaven and earth, and never looked at
that sad beach around him, all strewn with the bones of men.

Then slowly rose up those three fair sisters, with a cruel smile upon
their lips; and slowly they crept down toward him, like leopards who
creep upon their prey; and their hands were like the talons of eagles,
as they stept across the bones of their victims to enjoy their cruel
feast.

But fairest Aphrodite saw him from the highest Idalian peak, and she
pitied his youth and his beauty, and leapt up from her golden throne;
and like a falling star she cleft the sky, and left a trail of
glittering light, till she stooped to the Isle of the Sirens, and
snatched their prey from their claws. And she lifted Butes as he lay
sleeping, and wrapt him in a golden mist; and she bore him to the peak
of Lilybæum; and he slept there many a pleasant year.

But when the Sirens saw that they were conquered, they shrieked for envy
and rage, and leapt from the beach into the sea, and were changed into
rocks until this day.

Then they came to the straits by Lilybæum, and saw Sicily, the
three-cornered island, under which Enceladus the giant lies groaning day
and night, and when he turns the earth quakes, and his breath bursts out
in roaring flames from the highest cone of AEtna, above the chestnut
woods. And there Charybdis caught them in its fearful coils of wave, and
rolled mast-high about them, and spun them round and round; and they
could go neither back nor forward, while the whirlpool sucked them in.

And while they struggled they saw near them, on the other side of the
strait, a rock stand in the water, with a peak wrapt round in clouds; a
rock which no man could climb, though he had twenty hands and feet, for
the stone was smooth and slippery, as if polished by man's hand; and
half way up a misty cave looked out toward the west.

And when Orpheus saw it, he groaned, and struck his hands together. And
"Little will it help to us," he cried, "to escape the jaws of the
whirlpool; for in that cave lives Scylla, the sea-hag with a young
whelp's voice; my mother warned me of her ere we sailed away from
Hellas; she has six heads, and six long necks, and hides in that dark
cleft. And from her cave she fishes for all things which pass by, for
sharks, and seals, and dolphins, and all the herds of Amphitrite. And
never ship's crew boasted that they came safe by her rock; for she bends
her long necks down to them, and every mouth takes up a man And who will
help us now? For Hera and Zeus hate us, and our ship is foul with guilt;
so we must die, whatever befalls."

Then out of the depths came Thetis, Peleus's silver-footed bride, for
love of her gallant husband, and all her nymphs around her; and they
played like snow-white dolphins, diving on from wave to wave, before the
ship, and in her wake, and beside her, as dolphins play. And they caught
the ship, and guided her, and passed her on from hand to hand, and
tossed her through the billows, as maidens toss the ball. And when
Scylla stooped to seize her, they struck back her ravening heads, and
foul Scylla whined, as a whelp whines, at the touch of their gentle
hands. But she shrank into her cave affrighted; for all bad things
shrink from good; and Argo leapt safe past her, while a fair breeze rose
behind. Then Thetis and her nymphs sank down to their gardens of green
and purple, where live flowers of bloom all the year round; while the
heroes went on rejoicing, yet dreading what might come next.

After that they rowed on steadily for many a weary day, till they saw a
long high island, and beyond it a mountain land. And they searched till
they found a harbour, and there rowed boldly in. But after awhile they
stopped, and wondered; for there stood a great city on the shore, and
temples and walls and gardens, and castles high in air upon the cliffs.
And on either side they saw a harbour, with a narrow mouth, but wide
within; and black ships without number, high and dry upon the shore.

Then Ancaius, the wise helmsman, spoke: "What new wonder is this? I know
all isles, and harbours, and the windings of all the seas; and this
should be Corcyra, where a few wild goatherds dwell. But whence come
these new harbours, and vast works of polished stone?"

But Jason said: "They can be no savage people. We will go in and take
our chance."

So they rowed into the harbour, among a thousand black-beaked ships,
each larger far than Argo, toward a quay of polished stone. And they
wondered at that mighty city, with its roofs of burnished brass, and
long and lofty walls of marble, with strong palisades above. And the
quays were full of people, merchants, and mariners, and slaves, going to
and fro with merchandise among the crowd of ships. And the heroes'
hearts were humbled, and they looked at each other and said: "We thought
ourselves a gallant crew when we sailed from Iolcos by the sea; but how
small we look before this city, like an ant before a hive of bees."

Then the sailors hailed them roughly from the quay:

"What men are you?--we want no strangers here, nor pirates. We keep our
business to ourselves."

But Jason answered gently, with many a flattering word, and praised
their city and their harbour, and their fleet of gallant ships. "Surely
you are the children of Poseidon, and the masters of the sea; and we are
but poor wandering mariners, worn out with thirst and toil. Give us but
food and water, and we will go on our voyage in peace."

Then the sailors laughed and answered: "Stranger, you are no fool; you
talk like an honest man, and you shall find us honest too. We are the
children of Poseidon, and the masters of the sea; but come ashore to us,
and you shall have the best that we can give."

So they limped ashore, all stiff and weary, with long ragged beards and
sunburnt cheeks, and garments torn and weather-stained, and weapons
rusted with the spray, while the sailors laughed at them (for they were
rough-tongued, though their hearts were frank and kind). And one said;
"These fellows are but raw sailors; they look as if they had been
sea-sick all the day." And another: "Their legs have grown crooked with
much rowing, till they waddle in their walk like ducks."

At that Idas the rash would have struck them; but Jason held him back,
till one of the merchant kings spoke to them, a tall and stately man.

"Do not be angry, strangers; the sailor boys must have their jest. But
we will treat you justly and kindly, for strangers and poor men come
from God; and you seem no common sailors by your strength, and height,
and weapons. Come up with me to the palace of Alcinous, the rich
sea-going king, and we will feast you well and heartily; and after that
you shall tell us your name."

But Medeia hung back, and trembled, and whispered in Jason's ear, "We
are betrayed, and are going to our ruin; for I see my countrymen among
the crowd; dark-eyed Colchi in steel mail shirts, such as they wear in
my father's land."

"It is too late to turn," said Jason. And he spoke to the merchant king:
"What country is this, good sir; and what is this new-built town?"

"This is the land of the Phæaces, beloved by all the Immortals; for they
come hither and feast like friends with us, and sit by our side in the
hall. Hither we came from Liburnia to escape the unrighteous Cyclopes;
for they robbed us, peaceful merchants, of our hard-earned wares and
wealth. So Nausithous, the son of Poseidon, brought us hither, and died
in peace; and now his son Alcinous rules us, and Arete the wisest of
queens."

So they went up across the square, and wondered still more as they went;
for along the quays lay in order great cables, and yards, and masts,
before the fair temple of Poseidon, the blue-haired king of the seas.
And round the square worked the shipwrights, as many in number as ants,
twining ropes, and hewing timber, and smoothing long yards and oars. And
the Minuai went on in silence through clean white marble streets, till
they came to the hall of Alcinous, and they wondered then still more.
For the lofty palace shone aloft in the sun, with walls of plated brass,
from the threshold to the innermost chamber, and the doors were of
silver and gold. And on each side of the doorway sat living dogs of
gold, who never grew old or died, so well Hephaistus had made them in
his forges in smoking Lemnos, and gave them to Alcinous to guard his
gates by night. And within, against the walls, stood thrones on either
side, down the whole length of the hall, strewn with rich glossy
shawls; and on them the merchant kings of those crafty sea-roving
Phæaces sat eating and drinking in pride, and feasting there all the
year round. And boys of molten gold stood each on a polished altar, and
held torches in their hands, to give light all night to the guests. And
round the house sat fifty maid servants, some grinding the meal in the
mill, some turning the spindle, some weaving at the loom, while their
hands twinkled as they passed the shuttle, like quivering aspen leaves.

And outside before the palace a great garden was walled round, filled
full of stately fruit trees, with olives and sweet figs, and
pomegranates, pears, and apples, which bore the whole year round. For
the rich southwest wind fed them, till pear grew ripe on pear, fig on
fig, and grape on grape, all the winter and the spring. And at the
further end gay flower beds bloomed through all seasons of the year; and
two fair fountains rose, and ran, one through the garden grounds, and
one beneath the palace gate, to water all the town. Such noble gifts the
heavens had given to Alcinous the wise.

So they went in, and saw him sitting, like Poseidon, on his throne, with
his golden sceptre by him, in garments stiff with gold, and in his hand
a sculptured goblet, as he pledged the merchant kings; and beside him
stood Arete, his wise and lovely queen, and leaned against a pillar, as
she spun her golden threads.

Then Alcinous rose, and welcomed them, and bade them sit and eat; and
the servants brought them tables, and bread, and meat, and wine.

But Medeia went on trembling toward Arete, the fair queen, and fell at
her knees, and clasped them, and cried weeping as she knelt:

"I am your guest, fair queen, and I entreat you be Zeus from whom
prayers come. Do not send me back to my father, to die some dreadful
death; but let me go my way, and bear my burden. Have I not had enough
of punishment and shame?"

"Who are you, strange maiden? and what is the meaning of your prayer?"

"I am Medeia, daughter of Aietes, and I saw my countrymen here to-day;
and I know that they are come to find me, and take me home to die some
dreadful death."

Then Arete frowned, and said: "Lead this girl in, my maidens; and let
the kings decide, not I."

And Alcinous leapt up from his throne, and cried, "Speak, strangers, who
are you? And who is this maiden?"

"We are the heroes of the Minuai," said Jason; "and this maiden has
spoken truth. We are the men who took the golden fleece, the men whose
fame has run round every shore. We came hither out of the ocean, after
sorrows such as man never saw before. We went out many, and come back
few, for many a noble comrade have we lost. So let us go, as you should
let your guests go, in peace; that the world may say, 'Alcinous is a
just king.'"

But Alcinous frowned, and stood deep in thought; and at last he spoke:

"Had not the deed been done, which is done, I should have said this day
to myself, 'It is an honour to Alcinous, and to his children after him,
that the far-famed Argonauts are his guests.' But these Colchi are my
guests, as you are; and for this month they have waited here with all
their fleet; for they have hunted all the seas of Hellas, and could not
find you, and dared neither go further, nor go home."

"Let them choose out their champions, and we will fight them, man for
man."

"No guest of ours shall fight upon our island; and if you go outside,
they will outnumber you. I will do justice between you; for I know and
do what is right."

Then he turned to his kings, and said: "This may stand over till
to-morrow. To-night we will feast our guests, and hear the story of all
their wanderings, and how they came hither out of the ocean."

So Alcinous bade the servants take the heroes in, and bathe them, and
give them clothes. And they were glad when they saw the warm water, for
it was long since they had bathed. And they washed off the sea salt from
their limbs, and anointed themselves from head to foot with oil, and
combed out their golden hair. Then they came back again into the hall,
while the merchant kings rose up to do them honour. And each man said to
his neighbour: "No wonder that these men won fame. How they stand now
like Giants, or Titans, or Immortals come down from Olympus, though many
a winter has worn them, and many a fearful storm. What must they have
been when they sailed from Iolcos, in the bloom of their youth, long
ago?"

Then they went out to the garden; and the merchant princes said:
"Heroes, run races with us. Let us see whose feet are nimblest."

"We cannot race against you, for our limbs are stiff from sea; and we
have lost our two swift comrades, the sons of the north wind. But do not
think us cowards; if you wish to try our strength, we will shoot and
box, and wrestle, against any men on earth."

And Alcinous smiled, and answered: "I believe you, gallant guests; with
your long limbs and broad shoulders, we could never match you here. For
we care nothing here for boxing, or for shooting with the bow; but for
feasts, and songs, and harping, and dancing, and running races, to
stretch our limbs on shore."

So they danced there and ran races, the jolly merchant kings, till the
night fell, and all went in.

And then they ate and drank, and comforted their weary souls, till
Alcinous called a herald, and bade him go and fetch the harper.

The herald went out, and fetched the harper, and led him in by the hand;
and Alcinous cut him a piece of meat from the fattest of the haunch, and
sent it to him, and said: "Sing to us, noble harper, and rejoice the
heroes' hearts."

So the harper played and sang, while the dancers danced strange figures;
and after that the tumblers showed their tricks, till the heroes laughed
again.

Then, "Tell me, heroes," asked Alcinous, "you who have sailed the ocean
round, and seen the manners of all nations, have you seen such dancers
as ours here? or heard such music and such singing? We hold ours to be
the best on earth."

"Such dancing we have never seen," said Orpheus; "and your singer is a
happy man; for Phœbus himself must have taught him, or else he is the
son of a Muse; as I am also, and have sung once or twice, though not so
well as he."

"Sing to us, then, noble stranger," said Alcinous; "and we will give you
precious gifts."

So Orpheus took his magic harp, and sang to them a stirring song of
their voyage from Iolcos, and their dangers, and how they won the
golden fleece; and of Medeia's love, and how she helped them, and went
with them over land and sea; and of all their fearful dangers, from
monsters, and rocks, and storms, till the heart of Arete was softened,
and all the women wept. And the merchant kings rose up, each man from
off his golden throne, and clasped their hands, and shouted: "Hail to
the noble Argonauts, who sailed the unknown seal"

Then he went on, and told their journey over the sluggish northern main,
and through the shoreless outer ocean, to the fairy island of the West;
and of the Sirens, and Scylla, and Charybdis, and all the wonders they
had seen, till midnight passed, and the day dawned; but the kings never
thought of sleep. Each man sat still and listened, with his chin upon
his hand.

And at last when Orpheus had ended, they all went thoughtful out, and
the heroes lay down to sleep, beneath the sounding porch outside, where
Arete had strewn them rugs and carpets, in the sweet still summer night.

But Arete pleaded hard with her husband for Medeia, for her heart was
softened. And she said: "The Gods will punish her, not we. After all,
she is our guest and my suppliant, and prayers are the daughters of
Zeus. And who, too, dare part man and wife, after all they have endured
together?"

And Alcinous smiled. "The minstrel's song has charmed you; but I must
remember what is right; for songs cannot alter justice; and I must be
faithful to my name. Alcinous I am called, the man of sturdy sense, and
Alcinous I will be." But for all that, Arete besought him, until she won
him round.

So next morning he sent a herald, and called the kings into the square,
and said: "This is a puzzling matter; remember but one thing. These
Minuai live close by us, and we may meet them often on the seas; but
Aietes lives afar off, and we have only heard his name. Which, then, of
the two is it safer to offend, the men near us, or the men far off?"

The princes laughed, and praised his wisdom; and Alcinous called the
heroes to the square, and the Colchi also; and they came and stood
opposite each other; but Medeia stayed in the palace. Then Alcinous
spoke: "Heroes of the Colchi, what is your errand about this lady?"

"To carry her home with us, that she may die a shameful death; but if we
return without her, we must die the death she should have died."

"What say you to this, Jason the AEolid?" said Alcinous, turning to the
Minuai.

"I say," said the cunning Jason, "that they are come here on a bootless
errand. Do you think that you can make her follow you, heroes of the
Colchi? her, who knows all spells and charms? She will cast away your
ships on quicksands, or call down on you Brimo the wild huntress; or the
chains will fall from off her wrists, and she will escape in her dragon
car; or if not thus, some other way; for she has a thousand plans and
wiles. And why return home at all, brave heroes, and face the long seas
again, and the Bosphorus, and the stormy Euxine, and double all your
toil? There is many a fair land round these coasts, which waits for
gallant men like you. Better to settle there, and build a city, and let
Aietes and Colchis help themselves."

Then a murmur rose among the Colchi, and some cried, "He has spoken
well"; and some, "We have had enough of roving, we will sail the seas
no more!" And the chief said at last, "Be it so, then; a plague she has
been to us, and a plague to the house of her father, and a plague she
will be to you. Take her, since you are no wiser; and we will sail away
toward the north."

Then Alcinous gave them food, and water, and garments, and rich presents
of all sorts; and he gave the same to the Minuai, and sent them all away
in peace.

So Jason kept the dark witch maiden to breed him woe and shame; and the
Colchi went northward into the Adriatic, and settled, and built towns
along the shore.

Then the heroes rowed away to the eastward, to reach Hellas their
beloved land; but a storm came down upon them, and swept them far away
toward the south. And they rowed till they were spent with struggling,
through the darkness and the blinding rain, but where they were they
could not tell, and they gave up all hope of life. And at last they
touched the ground, and when daylight came they waded to the shore; and
saw nothing round but sand, and desolate salt pools; for they had come
to the quicksands of the Syrtis, and the dreary treeless flats, which
lie between Numidia and Cyrene, on the burning shore of Africa. And
there they wandered starving for many a weary day, ere they could launch
their ship again, and gain the open sea. And there Canthus was killed
while he was trying to drive off sheep, by a stone which a herdsman
threw.

And there, too, Mopsus died, the seer who knew the voices of all birds;
but he could not foretell his own end, for he was bitten in the foot by
a snake, one of those which sprang from the Gorgon's head when Perseus
carried it across the sands.

At last they rowed away toward the northward, for many a weary day,
till their water was spent, and their food eaten; and they were worn out
with hunger and thirst. But at last they saw a long steep island, and a
blue peak high among the clouds; and they knew it for the peak of Ida,
and the famous land of Crete. And they said, "We will land in Crete, and
see Minos the just king, and all his glory and his wealth; at least he
will treat us hospitably, and let us fill our water casks upon the
shore."

But when they came nearer to the island they saw a wondrous sight upon
the cliffs. For on a cape to the westward stood a giant, taller than any
mountain pine; who glittered aloft against the sky like a tower of
burnished brass. He turned and looked on all sides round him, till he
saw the Argo and her crew; and when he saw them he came toward them,
more swiftly than the swiftest horse, leaping across the glens at a
bound, and striding at one step from down to down. And when he came
abreast of them he brandished his arms up and down, as a ship hoists and
lowers her yards, and shouted with his brazen throat like a trumpet from
off the hills: "You are pirates, you are robbers! If you dare land here,
you die."

Then the heroes cried: "We are no pirates. We are all good men and true;
and all we ask is food and water"; but the giant cried the more--

"You are robbers, you are pirates all; I know you; and if you land, you
shall die the death."

Then he waved his arms again as a signal, and they saw the people flying
inland, driving their flocks before them, while a great flame arose
among the hills. Then the giant ran up a valley and vanished; and the
heroes lay on their oars in fear.

But Medeia stood watching all, from under her steep black brows, with a
cunning smile upon her lips, and a cunning plot within her heart. At
last she spoke; "I know this giant. I heard of him in the East.
Hephaistos the Fire King made him, in his forge in AEtna beneath the
earth, and called him Talus, and gave him to Minos for a servant, to
guard the coast of Crete. Thrice a day he walks round the island, and
never stops to sleep; and if strangers land he leaps into his furnace,
which flames there among the hills; and when he is red hot he rushes on
them, and burns them in his brazen hands."

Then all the heroes cried, "What shall we do, wise Medeia? We must have
water, or we die of thirst. Flesh and blood we can face fairly; but who
can face this red-hot brass?"

"I can face red-hot brass, if the tale I hear be true. For they say
that he has but one vein in all his body, filled with liquid fire; and
that this vein is closed with a nail; but I know not where that nail is
placed. But if I can get it once into these hands, you shall water your
ship here in peace."

Then she bade them put her on shore, and row off again, and wait what
would befall.

And the heroes obeyed her unwillingly; for they were ashamed to leave
her so alone; but Jason said, "She is dearer to me than to any of you,
yet I will trust her freely on shore; she has more plots than we can
dream of, in the windings of that fair and cunning head."

So they left the witch maiden on the shore; and she stood there in her
beauty all alone, till the giant strode back red hot from head to heel,
while the grass hissed and smoked beneath his tread.

And when he saw the maiden alone, he stopped; and she looked boldly up
into his face without moving, and began her magic song:

"Life is short, though life is sweet; and even men of brass and fire
must die. The brass must rust, the fire must cool, for time gnaws all
things in their turn. Life is short, though life is sweet; but sweeter
to live forever; sweeter to live ever youthful like the Gods, who have
ichor in their veins; ichor which gives life, and youth, and joy, and a
bounding heart."

Then Talus said, "Who are you, strange maiden; and where is this ichor
of youth?"

Then Medeia held up a flask of crystal, and said, "Here is the ichor of
youth. I am Medeia the enchantress; my sister Circe gave me this, and
said, 'Go and reward Talus the faithful servant, for his fame is gone
out into all lands.' So come, and I will pour this into your veins, that
you may live forever young."

And he listened to her false words, that simple Talus, and came near;
and Medeia said, "Dip yourself in the sea first, and cool yourself, lest
you burn my tender hands, then show me where the nail in your vein is,
that I may pour the ichor in."

Then that simple Talus dipped himself in the sea, till it hissed, and
roared, and smoked; and came and knelt before Medeia, and showed her the
secret nail.

And she drew the nail out gently; but she poured no ichor in; and
instead the liquid fire spouted forth, like a stream of red-hot iron.
And Talus tried to leap up, crying, "You have betrayed me, false witch
maiden!" But she lifted up her hands before him, and sang, till he sank
beneath her spell. And as he sank, his brazen limbs clanked heavily, and
the earth groaned beneath his weight; and the liquid fire ran from his
heel, like a stream of lava to the sea; and Medeia laughed, and called
to the heroes, "Come ashore, and water your ship in peace."

So they came, and found the giant lying dead; and they fell down, and
kissed Medeia's feet; and watered their ship, and took sheep and oxen,
and so left that inhospitable shore.

At last, after many more adventures, they came to the Cape of Malea, at
the southwest point of the Peloponnese. And there they offered
sacrifices, and Orpheus purged them from their guilt. Then they rowed
away again to the northward, past the Laconian shore, and came all worn
and tired by Sunium, and up the long Eubœan Strait, until they saw
once more Pelion, and Aphetai, and Iolcos by the sea.

And they ran the ship ashore; but they had no strength left to haul her
up the beach; and they crawled out on the pebbles, and sat down, and
wept till they could weep no more. For the houses and the trees were all
altered; and all the faces which they saw were strange; and their joy
was swallowed up in sorrow, while they thought of their youth, and all
their labour, and the gallant comrades they had lost.

And the people crowded round, and asked them, "Who are you, that you sit
weeping here?"

"We are the sons of your princes, who sailed out many a year ago. We
went to fetch the golden fleece; and we have brought it, and grief
therewith. Give us news of our fathers and our mothers, if any of them
be left alive on earth."

Then there was shouting and laughing, and weeping; and all the kings
came to the shore, and they led away the heroes to their homes, and
bewailed the valiant dead.

Then Jason went up with Medeia to the palace of his uncle Pelias. And
when he came in, Pelias sat by the hearth, crippled and blind with age;
while opposite him sat AEson, Jason's father, crippled and blind
likewise; and the two old men's heads shook together, as they tried to
warm themselves before the fire.

And Jason fell down at his father's knees, and wept, and called him by
his name. And the old man stretched his hands out, and felt him, and
said: "Do not mock me, young hero. My son Jason is dead long ago at
sea."

"I am your own son Jason, whom you trusted to the Centaur upon Pelion;
and I have brought home the golden fleece, and a princess of the Sun's
race for my bride. So now give me up the kingdom, Pelias my uncle, and
fulfil your promise as I have fulfilled mine."

Then his father clung to him like a child, and wept, and would not let
him go; and cried, "Now I shall not go down lonely to my grave. Promise
me never to leave me till I die."


PART VI

_What Was the End of the Heroes_

And now I wish that I could end my story pleasantly; but it is no fault
of mine that I cannot. The old songs end it sadly, and I believe that
they are right and wise; for though the heroes were purified at Malea,
yet sacrifices cannot make bad hearts good, and Jason had taken a wicked
wife, and he had to bear his burden to the last.

And first she laid a cunning plot, to punish that poor old Pelias,
instead of letting him die in peace.

For she told his daughters: "I can make old things young again; I will
show you how easy it is to do." So she took an old ram and killed him,
and put him in a cauldron with magic herbs; and whispered her spells
over him, and he leapt out again a young lamb. So that "Medeia's
cauldron" is a proverb still, by which we mean times of war and change,
when the world has become old and feeble, and grows young again through
bitter pains.

Then she said to Pelias's daughters: "Do to your father as I did to this
ram, and he will grow young and strong again." But she only told them
half the spell; so they failed, while Medeia mocked them; and poor old
Pelias died, and his daughters came to misery. But the songs say she
cured AEson, Jason's father, and he became young and strong again.

But Jason could not love her, after all her cruel deeds. So he was
ungrateful to her, and wronged her: and she revenged herself on him. And
a terrible revenge she took--too terrible to speak of here. But you will
hear of it yourselves when you grow up, for it has been sung in noble
poetry and music; and whether it be true or not, it stands forever as a
warning to us, not to seek for help from evil persons, or to gain good
ends by evil means. For if we use an adder even against our enemies, it
will turn again and sting us.

But of all the other heroes there is many a brave tale left, which I
have no space to tell you, so you must read them for yourselves--of the
hunting of the boar in Calydon, which Meleager killed; and of Heracles's
twelve famous labours; and of the seven who fought at Thebes; and of
the noble love of Castor and Polydeuces, the twin Dioscouroi; how when
one died, the other would not live without him, so they shared their
immortality between them; and Zeus changed them into the two twin stars,
which never rise both at once.

And what became of Cheiron, the good immortal beast? That, too, is a sad
story; for the heroes never saw him more. He was wounded by a poisoned
arrow, at Pholoc among the hills, when Heracles opened the fatal wine
jar, which Cheiron had warned him not to touch. And the Centaurs smelt
the wine, and flocked to it, and fought for it with Heracles; but he
killed them all with his poisoned arrows, and Cheiron was left alone.
Then Cheiron took up one of the arrows, and dropped it by chance upon
his foot; and the poison ran like fire along his veins, and he lay down,
and longed to die; and cried: "Through wine I perish, the bane of all my
race. Why should I live forever in this agony? Who will take my
immortality that I may die?"

Then Prometheus answered, the good Titan, whom Heracles had set free
from Caucasus: "I will take your immortality and live forever, that I
may help poor mortal men." So Cheiron gave him his immortality, and
died, and had rest from pain. And Heracles and Prometheus wept over him,
and went to bury him on Pelion; but Zeus took him up among the stars, to
live forever, grand and mild, low down in the far southern sky.

And in time the heroes died, all but Nestor the silver-tongued old man;
and left behind them valiant sons, but not so great as they had been.
Yet their fame, too, lives till this day; for they fought at the ten
years' siege of Troy; and their story is in the book which we call
Homer, in two of the noblest songs on earth; the Iliad, which tells us
of the siege of Troy, and Achilles's quarrel with the kings; and the
Odyssey, which tells the wanderings of Odysseus, through many lands for
many years; and how Alcinous sent him home at last, safe to Ithaca his
beloved island, and to Penelope his faithful wife, and Telemachus his
son, and Euphorbus the noble swineherd, and the old dog who licked his
hand and died.


