In one of the large and rich cities of China, there once lived a tailor
named Mustapha. He was very poor. He could hardly, by his daily labour,
maintain himself and his family, which consisted only of his wife and a
son.

His son, who was called Aladdin, was a very careless and idle fellow. He
was disobedient to his father and mother, and would go out early in the
morning and stay out all day, playing in the streets and public places
with idle children of his own age.

When he was old enough to learn a trade, his father took him into his
own shop, and taught him how to use his needle; but all his father's
endeavours to keep him to his work were vain, for no sooner was his back
turned, than he was gone for that day, Mustapha chastised him, but
Aladdin was incorrigible, and his father, to his great grief, was forced
to abandon him to his idleness; and was so much troubled about him, that
he fell sick and died in a few months.

Aladdin, who was now no longer restrained by the fear of a father, gave
himself entirely over to his idle habits, and was never out of the
streets from his companions. This course he followed till he was fifteen
years old, without giving his mind to any useful pursuit, or the least
reflection on what would become of him. As he was one day playing,
according to custom, in the street, with his evil associates, a stranger
passing by stood to observe him.

This stranger was a sorcerer, known as the African magician, as he had
been but two days arrived from Africa, his native country.

The African magician, observing in Aladdin's countenance something which
assured him that he was a fit boy for his purpose, inquired his name and
history of some of his companions, and when he had learnt all he desired
to know, went up to him, and taking him aside from his comrades, said,
"Child, was not your father called Mustapha the tailor?" "Yes, sir,"
answered the boy, "but he has been dead a long time."

At these words the African magician threw his arms about Aladdin's neck,
and kissed him several times, with tears in his eyes, and said, "I am
your uncle. Your worthy father was my own brother. I knew you at first
sight, you are so like him." Then he gave Aladdin a handful of small
money, saying, "Go, my son, to your mother, give my love to her, and
tell her that I will visit her to-morrow, that I may see where my good
brother lived so long, and ended his days."

Aladdin ran to his mother, overjoyed at the money his uncle had given
him. "Mother," said he, "have I an uncle?" "No, child," replied his
mother, "you have no uncle by your father's side or mine." "I am just
now come," said Aladdin, "from a man who says he is my uncle and my
father's brother. He cried and kissed me when I told him my father was
dead, and gave me money, sending his love to you, and promising to come
and pay you a visit, that he may see the house my father lived and died
in." "Indeed, child," replied the mother, "your father had no brother,
nor have you an uncle."

The next day the magician found Aladdin playing in another part of the
town, and embracing him as before, put two pieces of gold into his hand,
and said to him, "Carry this, child, to your mother; tell her that I
will come and see her to-night, and bid her get us something for supper;
but first show ms the house where you live."

Aladdin showed the African magician the house, and carried the two
pieces of gold to his mother, who went out and bought provisions; and
considering she wanted various utensils, borrowed them of her
neighbours. She spent the whole day in preparing the supper; and at
night, when it was ready, said to her son, "Perhaps the stranger knows
not how to find our house; go and bring him, if you meet with him."

Aladdin was just ready to go, when the magician knocked at the door, and
came in loaded with wine and all sorts of fruits, which he brought for a
dessert. After he had given what he brought into Aladdin's hands, he
saluted his mother, and desired her to show him the place where his
brother Mustapha used to sit on the sofa; and when she had so done, he
fell down and kissed it several times, crying out, with tears in his
eyes, "My poor brother! how unhappy am I, not to have come soon enough
to give you one last embrace." Aladdin's mother desired him to sit down
in the same place, but he declined. "No," said he, "I shall not do that;
but give me leave to sit opposite to it, that although I see not the
master of a family so dear to me, I may at least behold the place where
he used to sit."

When the magician had made choice of a place, and sat down, he began to
enter into discourse with Aladdin's mother. "My good sister," said he,
"do not be surprised at your never having seen me all the time you have
been married to my brother Mustapha of happy memory. I have been forty
years absent from this country, which is my native place, as well as my
late brother's; and during that time have travelled into the Indies,
Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt, and afterward crossed over into
Africa, where I took up my abode. At last, as it is natural for a man, I
was desirous to see my native country again, and to embrace my dear
brother; and finding I had strength enough to undertake so long a
journey, I made the necessary preparations, and set out. Nothing ever
afflicted me so much as hearing of my brother's death. But God be
praised for all things! It is a comfort for me to find, as it were, my
brother in a son, who has his most remarkable features."

The African magician perceiving that the widow wept at the remembrance
of her husband, changed the conversation, and turning toward her son,
asked him, "What business do you follow? Are you of any trade?"

At this question the youth hung down his head, and was not a little
abashed when his mother answered "Aladdin is an idle fellow. His father,
when alive, strove all he could to teach him his trade, but could not
succeed; and since his death, notwithstanding all I can say to him, he
does nothing but idle away his time in the streets, as you saw him,
without considering he is no longer a child; and if you do not make him
ashamed of it, I despair of his ever coming to any good. For my part, I
am resolved, one of these days, to turn him out of doors, and let him
provide for himself."

After these words, Aladdin's mother burst into tears; and the magician
said, "This is not well, nephew; you must think of helping yourself, and
getting your livelihood. There are many sorts of trades; perhaps you do
not like your father's, and would prefer another; I will endeavour to
help you. If you have no mind to learn any handicraft, I will take a
shop for you, furnish it with all sorts of fine stuffs and linens; and
then with the money you make of them you can lay in fresh goods, and
live in an honourable way. Tell me freely what you think of my proposal;
you shall always find me ready to keep my word."

This plan just suited Aladdin, who hated work. He told the magician he
had a greater inclination to that business than to any other, and that
he should be much obliged to him for his kindness. "Well then," said the
African magician, "I will carry you with me to-morrow, clothe you as
handsomely as the best merchants in the city, and afterward we will open
a shop as I mentioned."

The widow, after his promises of kindness to her son, no longer doubted
that the magician was her husband's brother. She thanked him for his
good intentions; and after having exhorted Aladdin to render himself
worthy of his uncle's favour, served up supper, at which they talked of
several indifferent matters; and then the magician took his leave and
retired.

He came again the next day, as he had promised, and took Aladdin with
him to a merchant, who sold all sorts of clothes for different ages and
ranks, ready made, and a variety of fine stuffs, and bade Aladdin choose
those he preferred, which he paid for.

When Aladdin found himself so handsomely equipped, he returned his uncle
thanks, who thus addressed him: "As you are soon to be a merchant, it is
proper you should frequent these shops, and be acquainted with them." He
then showed him the largest and finest mosques, carried him to the khans
or inns where the merchants and travellers lodged, and afterward to the
sultan's palace, where he had free access; and at last brought him to
his own khan, where, meeting with some merchants he had become
acquainted with since his arrival, he gave them a treat, to bring them
and his pretended nephew acquainted.

This entertainment lasted till night, when Aladdin would have taken
leave of his uncle to go home; the magician would not let him go by
himself, but conducted him to his mother, who, as soon as she saw him so
well dressed, was transported with joy, and bestowed a thousand
blessings upon the magician.

Early the next morning the magician called again for Aladdin, and said
he would take him to spend that day in the country, and on the next he
would purchase the shop. He then led him out at one of the gates of the
city, to some magnificent palaces, to each of which belonged beautiful
gardens, into which anybody might enter. At every building he came to,
he asked Aladdin if he did not think it fine; and the youth was ready to
answer when any one presented itself, crying out, "Here is a finer
house, uncle, than any we have yet seen," By this artifice, the cunning
magician led Aladdin some way into the country; and as he meant to carry
him farther, to execute his design, he took an opportunity to sit down
in one of the gardens, on the brink of a fountain of clear water, which
discharged itself by a lion's mouth of bronze into a basin, pretending
to be tired: "Come, nephew," said he, "you must be weary as well as I;
let us rest ourselves, and we shall be better able to pursue our walk."

The magician next pulled from his girdle a handkerchief with cakes and
fruit, and during this short repast he exhorted his nephew to leave off
bad company, and to seek that of wise and prudent men, to improve by
their conversation; "for," said he, "you will soon be at man's estate,
and you cannot too early begin to imitate their example." When they had
eaten as much as they liked, they got up, and pursued their walk through
gardens separated from one another only by small ditches, which marked
out the limits without interrupting the communication; so great was the
confidence the inhabitants reposed in each other. By this means the
African magician drew Aladdin insensibly beyond the gardens, and crossed
the country, till they nearly reached the mountains.

At last they arrived between two mountains of moderate height and equal
size, divided by a narrow valley, which was the place where the magician
intended to execute the design that had brought him from Africa to
China. "We will go no farther now," said he to Aladdin; "I will show you
here some extraordinary things, which, when you have seen, you will
thank me for: but while I strike a light, gather up all the loose dry
sticks you can see, to kindle a fire with."

Aladdin found so many dried sticks, that he soon collected a great heap.
The magician presently set them on fire; and when they were in a blaze,
threw in some incense, pronouncing several magical words, which Aladdin
did not understand.

He had scarcely done so when the earth opened just before the magician,
and discovered a stone with a brass ring fixed in it. Aladdin was so
frightened that he would have run away, but the magician caught hold of
him, and gave him such a box on the ear that he knocked him down.
Aladdin got up trembling, and with tears in his eyes said to the
magician, "What have I done, uncle, to be treated in this severe
manner?" "I am your uncle," answered the magician; "I supply the place
of your father, and you ought to make no reply. But child," added he,
softening, "do not be afraid; for I shall not ask anything of you, but
that you obey me punctually, if you would reap the advantages which I
intend you. Know, then, that under this stone there is hidden a
treasure, destined to be yours, and which will make you richer than the
greatest monarch in the world. No person but yourself is permitted to
lift this stone, or enter the cave; so you must punctually execute what
I may command, for it is a matter of great consequence both to you and
me."

Aladdin, amazed at all he saw and heard, forgot what was past, and
rising said, "Well, uncle, what is to be done? Command me, I am ready to
obey." "I am overjoyed, child," said the African magician, embracing
him, "Take hold of the ring, and lift up that stone." "Indeed, uncle,"
replied Aladdin, "I am not strong enough; you must help me." "You have
no occasion for my assistance," answered the magician; "if I help you,
we shall be able to do nothing. Take hold of the ring, and lift it up;
you will find it will come easily." Aladdin did as the magician bade
him, raised the stone with ease, and laid it on one side.

When the stone was pulled up, there appeared a staircase about three or
four feet deep, leading to a door. "Descend, my son," said the African
magician, "those steps, and open that door. It will lead you into a
palace, divided into three great halls. In each of these you will see
four large brass cisterns placed on each side, full of gold and silver;
but take care you do not meddle with them. Before you enter the first
hall, be sure to tuck up your robe, wrap it about you, and then pass
through the second into the third without stopping. Above all things,
have a care that you do not touch the walls so much as with your
clothes; for if you do, you will die instantly. At the end of the third
hall, you will find a door which opens into a garden, planted with fine
trees loaded with fruit. Walk directly across the garden to a terrace,
where you will see a niche before you, and in that niche a lighted lamp.
Take the lamp down and put it out. When you have thrown away the wick
and poured out the liquor, put it in your waistband and bring it to me.
Do not be afraid that the liquor will spoil your clothes, for it is not
oil, and the lamp will be dry as soon as it is thrown out."

After these words the magician drew a ring off his finger, and put it on
one of Aladdin's, saying, "It is a talisman against all evil, so long as
you obey me. Go, therefore, boldly, and we shall both be rich all our
lives."

Aladdin descended the steps, and, opening the door, found the three
halls just as the African magician had described. He went through them
with all the precaution the fear of death could inspire, crossed the
garden without stopping, took down the lamp from the niche, threw out
the wick and the liquor, and, as the magician had desired, put it in his
waistband. But as he came down from the terrace, seeing it was perfectly
dry, he stopped in the garden to observe the trees, which were loaded
with extraordinary fruit of different colours on each tree. Some bore
fruit entirely white, and some clear and transparent as crystal; some
pale red, and others deeper; some green, blue, and purple, and others
yellow; in short, there was fruit of all colours. The white were pearls;
the clear and transparent, diamonds; the deep red, rubies; the paler,
balas rubies; the green, emeralds; the blue, turquoises; the purple,
amethysts; and the yellow, sapphires. Aladdin, ignorant of their value,
would have preferred figs, or grapes, or pomegranates; but as he had his
uncle's permission, he resolved to gather some of every sort. Having
filled the two new purses his uncle had bought for him with his clothes,
he wrapped some up in the skirts of his vest, and crammed his bosom as
full as it could hold.

Aladdin, having thus loaded himself with riches of which he knew not the
value, returned through the three halls with the utmost precaution, and
soon arrived at the mouth of the cave, where the African magician
awaited him with the utmost impatience. As soon as Aladdin saw him, he
cried out, "Pray, uncle, lend me your hand, to help me out." "Give me
the lamp first," replied the magician; "it will be troublesome to you,"
"Indeed, uncle," answered Aladdin, "I cannot now, but I will as soon as
I am up." The African magician was determined that he would have the
lamp before he would help him up; and Aladdin, who had encumbered
himself so much with his fruit that he could not well get at it, refused
to give it to him till he was out of the cave. The African magician,
provoked at this obstinate refusal, flew into a passion, threw a little
of his incense into the fire, and pronounced two magical words, when the
stone which had closed the mouth of the staircase moved into its place,
with the earth over it in the same manner as it lay at the arrival of
the magician and Aladdin.

This action of the magician plainly revealed to Aladdin that he was no
uncle of his, but one who designed him evil. The truth was that he had
learnt from his magic books the secret and the value of this wonderful
lamp, the owner of which would be made richer than any earthly ruler,
and hence his journey to China. His art had also told him that he was
not permitted to take it himself, but must receive it as a voluntary
gift from the hands of another person. Hence he employed young Aladdin,
and hoped by a mixture of kindness and authority to make him obedient to
his word and will. When he found that his attempt had failed, he set out
to return to Africa, but avoided the town, lest any person who had seen
him leave in company with Aladdin should make inquiries after the youth.
Aladdin being suddenly enveloped in darkness, cried, and called out to
his uncle to tell him he was ready to give him the lamp; but in vain,
since his cries could not be heard. He descended to the bottom of the
steps, with a design to get into the palace, but the door, which was
opened before by enchantment, was now shut by the same means. He then
redoubled his cries and tears, sat down on the steps without any hopes
of ever seeing light again, and in an expectation of passing from the
present darkness to a speedy death. In this great emergency he said,
"There is no strength or power but in the great and high God"; and in
joining his hands to pray he rubbed the ring which the magician had put
on his finger. Immediately a genie of frightful aspect appeared, and
said, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee. I serve him who
possesses the ring on thy finger; I, and the other slaves of that ring."

At another time Aladdin would have been frightened at the sight of so
extraordinary a figure, but the danger he was in made him answer without
hesitation, "Whoever thou art, deliver me from this place." He had no
sooner spoken these words, than he found himself on the very spot where
the magician had last left him, and no sign of cave or opening, nor
disturbance of the earth. Returning God thanks to find himself once more
in the world, he made the best of his way home. When he got within his
mother's door, the joy to see her and his weakness for want of
sustenance made him so faint that he remained for a long time as dead.
As soon as he recovered, he related to his mother all that had happened
to him, and they were both very vehement in their complaints of the
cruel magician. Aladdin slept very soundly till late the next morning,
when the first thing he said to his mother was, that he wanted something
to eat, and wished she would give him his breakfast. "Alas! child," said
she, "I have not a bit of bread to give you; you ate up all the
provisions I had in the house yesterday; but I have a little cotton
which I have spun; I will go and sell it, and buy bread and something
for our dinner." "Mother," replied Aladdin, "keep your cotton for
another time, and give me the lamp I brought home with me yesterday; I
will go and sell it, and the money I shall get for it will serve both
for breakfast and dinner, and perhaps supper too."

Aladdin's mother took the lamp and said to her son, "Here it is, but it
is very dirty; if it were a little cleaner I believe it would bring
something more." She took some fine sand and water to clean it; but had
no sooner begun to rub it, than in an instant a hideous genie of
gigantic size appeared before her, and said to her in a voice of
thunder, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave,
and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I and the
other slaves of the lamp."

Aladdin's mother, terrified at the sight of the genie, fainted; when
Aladdin, who had seen such a phantom in the cavern, snatched the lamp
out of his mother's hand, and said to the genie boldly, "I am hungry,
bring me something to eat." The genie disappeared immediately, and in an
instant returned with a large silver tray, holding twelve covered dishes
of the same metal, which contained the most delicious viands; six large
white bread cakes on two plates, two flagons of wine, and two silver
cups. All these he placed upon a carpet and disappeared; this was done
before Aladdin's mother recovered from her swoon.

Aladdin had fetched some water, and sprinkled it in her face to recover
her. Whether that or the smell of the meat effected her cure, it was not
long before she came to herself. "Mother," said Aladdin, "be not afraid:
get up and eat; here is what will put you in heart, and at the same time
satisfy my extreme hunger."

His mother was much surprised to see the great tray, twelve dishes, six
loaves, the two flagons and cups, and to smell the savoury odour which
exhaled from the dishes. "Child," said she, "to whom are we obliged for
this great plenty and liberality? Has the sultan been made acquainted
with our poverty, and had compassion on us?" "It is no matter, mother,"
said Aladdin, "let us sit down and eat; for you have almost as much need
of a good breakfast as myself; when we have done, I will tell you."
Accordingly, both mother and son sat down and ate with the better relish
as the table was so well furnished. But all the time Aladdin's mother
could not forbear looking at and admiring the tray and dishes, though
she could not judge whether they were silver or any other metal, and the
novelty more than the value attracted her attention.

The mother and son sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and then
they thought it would be best to put the two meals together; yet, after
this they found they should have enough left for supper, and two meals
for the next day.

When Aladdin's mother had taken away and set by what was left, she went
and sat down by her son on the sofa, saying, "I expect now that you
should satisfy my impatience, and tell me exactly what passed between
the genie and you while I was in a swoon"; which he readily complied
with.

She was in as great amazement at what her son told her, as at the
appearance of the genie; and said to him, "But, son, what have we to do
with genies? I never heard that any of my acquaintance had ever seen
one. How came that vile genie to address himself to me, and not to you,
to whom he had appeared before in the cave?" "Mother," answered Aladdin,
"the genie you saw is not the one who appeared to me. If you remember,
he that I first saw called himself the slave of the ring on my finger;
and this you saw, called himself the slave of the lamp you had in your
hand; but I believe you did not hear him, for I think you fainted as
soon as he began to speak."

"What!" cried the mother, "was your lamp then the occasion of that
cursed genie's addressing himself rather to me than to you? Ah! my son,
take it out of my sight, and put it where you please. I had rather you
would sell it than run the hazard of being frightened to death again by
touching it; and if you would take my advice, you would part also with
the ring, and not have anything to do with genies, who, as our prophet
has told us, are only devils."

"With your leave, mother," replied Aladdin, "I shall now take care how I
sell a lamp which may be so serviceable both to you and me. That false
and wicked magician would not have undertaken so long a journey to
secure this wonderful lamp if he had not known its value to exceed that
of gold and silver. And since we have honestly come by it, let us make a
profitable use of it, without making any great show, and exciting the
envy and jealousy of our neighbours. However, since the genies frighten
you so much, I will take it out of your sight, and put it where I may
find it when I want it. The ring I cannot resolve to part with; for
without that you had never seen me again; and though I am alive now,
perhaps, if it were gone, I might not be so some moments hence;
therefore, I hope you will give me leave to keep it, and to wear it
always on my finger." Aladdin's mother replied that he might do what he
pleased; for her part, she would have nothing to do with genies, and
never say anything more about them.

By the next night they had eaten all the provisions the genie had
brought; and the next day Aladdin, who could not bear the thoughts of
hunger, putting one of the silver dishes tinder his vest, went out early
to sell it, and addressing himself to a Jew whom he met in the streets,
took him aside, and pulling out the plate, asked him if he would buy it.
The cunning Jew took the dish, examined it, and as soon as he found that
it was good silver, asked Aladdin at how much he valued it. Aladdin, who
had never been used to such traffic, told him he would trust to his
judgment and honour. The Jew was somewhat confounded at this plain
dealing; and doubting whether Aladdin understood the material or the
full value of what he offered to sell, took a piece of gold out of his
purse and gave it him, though it was but the sixtieth part of the worth
of the plate. Aladdin, taking the money very eagerly, retired with so
much haste, that the Jew, not content with the exorbitancy of his
profit, was vexed he had not penetrated into his ignorance, and was
going to run after him, to endeavour to get some change out of the piece
of gold; but he ran so fast, and had got so far, that it would have been
impossible for him to overtake him.

Before Aladdin went home, he called at a baker's, bought some cakes of
bread, changed his money, and on his return gave the rest to his mother,
who went and purchased provisions enough to last them some time. After
this manner they lived, till Aladdin had sold the twelve dishes singly,
as necessity pressed, to the Jew, for the same money; who, after the
first time, durst not offer him less, for fear of losing so good a
bargain. When he had sold the last dish, he had recourse to the tray,
which weighed ten times as much as the dishes, and would have carried it
to his old purchaser, but that it was too large and cumbersome;
therefore he was obliged to bring him home with him to his mother's,
where, after the Jew had examined the weight of the tray, he laid down
ten pieces of gold, with which Aladdin was very well satisfied.

When all the money was spent, Aladdin had recourse again to the lamp. He
took it in his hands, looked for the part where his mother had rubbed it
with the sand, rubbed it also, when the genie immediately appeared, and
said, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and
the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I, and the
other slaves of the lamp." "I am hungry," said Aladdin, "bring me
something to eat." The genie disappeared, and presently returned with a
tray, the same number of covered dishes as before, set them down, and
vanished.

As soon as Aladdin found that their provisions were again expended, he
took one of the dishes, and went to look for his Jew chapman; but
passing by a goldsmith's shop, the goldsmith perceiving him, called to
him, and said, "My lad, I imagine that you have something to sell to the
Jew, whom I often see you visit; but perhaps you do not know that he is
the greatest rogue even among the Jews. I will give you the full worth
of what you have to sell, or I will direct you to other merchants who
will not cheat you."

This offer induced Aladdin to pull his plate from tinder his vest and
show it to the goldsmith; who at first sight saw that it was made of the
finest silver, and asked him if he had sold such as that to the Jew;
when Aladdin told him that he had sold him twelve such, for a piece of
gold each. "What a villain!" cried the goldsmith. "But," added he, "my
son, what is past cannot be recalled. By showing you the value of this
plate, which is of the finest silver we use in our shops, I will let you
see how much the Jew has cheated you."

The goldsmith took a pair of scales, weighed the dish, and assured him
that his plate would fetch by weight sixty pieces of gold, which he
offered to pay down immediately.

Aladdin thanked him for his fair dealing, and never after went to any
other person.

Though Aladdin and his mother had an inexhaustible treasure in their
lamp, and might have had whatever they wished for, yet they lived with
the same frugality as before, and it may easily be supposed that the
money for which Aladdin had sold the dishes and tray was sufficient to
maintain them some time.

During this interval, Aladdin frequented the shops of the principal
merchants, where they sold cloth of gold and silver, linens, silk
stuffs, and jewellery, and, oftentimes joining in their conversation,
acquired a knowledge of the world, and a desire to improve himself. By
his acquaintance among the jewellers, he came to know that the fruits
which he had gathered when he took the lamp were, instead of coloured
glass, stones of inestimable value; but he had the prudence not to
mention this to any one, not even to his mother.

One day as Aladdin was walking about the town, he heard an order
proclaimed, commanding the people to shut up their shops and houses, and
keep within doors while the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, the sultan's
daughter, went to the bath and returned.

This proclamation inspired Aladdin with eager desire to see the
princess's face, which he determined to gratify, by placing himself
behind the door of the bath, so that he could not fail to see her face.

Aladdin had not long concealed himself before the princess came. She was
attended by a great crowd of ladies, slaves, and mutes, who walked on
each side and behind her. When she came within three or four paces of
the door of the bath, she took off her veil, and gave Aladdin an
opportunity of a full view of her face.

The princess was a noted beauty: her eyes were large, lively, and
sparkling; her smile bewitching; her nose faultless; her mouth small;
her lips vermilion. It is not therefore surprising that Aladdin, who had
never before seen such a blaze of charms, was dazzled and enchanted.

After the princess had passed by, and entered the bath, Aladdin quitted
his hiding-place, and went home. His mother perceived him to be more
thoughtful and melancholy than usual; and asked what had happened to
make him so, or if he was ill. He then told his mother all his
adventure, and concluded by declaring, "I love the princess more than I
can express, and am resolved that I will ask her in marriage of the
sultan."

Aladdin's mother listened with surprise to what her son told her; but
when he talked of asking the princess in marriage, she laughed aloud.
"Alas! child," said she, "what are you thinking of? You must be mad to
talk thus."

"I assure you, mother," replied Aladdin, "that I am not mad, but in my
right senses. I foresaw that you would reproach me with folly and
extravagance; but I must tell you once more, that I am resolved to
demand the princess of the sultan in marriage; nor do I despair of
success. I have the slaves of the lamp and of the ring to help me, and
you know how powerful their aid is. And I have another secret to tell
you: those pieces of glass, which I got from the trees in the garden of
the subterranean palace, are jewels of inestimable value, and fit fit
for the greatest monarchs. All the precious stones the jewellers have in
Bagdad are not to be compared to mine for size or beauty; and I am sure
that the offer of them will secure the favour of the sultan. You have a
large porcelain dish fit to hold them; fetch it, and let us see how they
will look, when we have arranged them according to their different
colours."

Aladdin's mother brought the china dish, when he took the jewels out of
the two purses in which he had kept them, and placed them in order,
according to his fancy. But the brightness and lustre they emitted in
the daytime, and the variety of the colours, so dazzled the eyes both of
mother and son, that they were astonished beyond measure. Aladdin's
mother, emboldened by the sight of these rich jewels, and fearful lest
her son should be guilty of greater extravagance, complied with his
request, and promised to go early in the next morning to the palace of
the sultan. Aladdin rose before daybreak, awakened his mother, pressing
her to go to the sultan's palace, and to get admittance, if possible,
before the grand vizier, the other viziers, and the great officers of
state went in to take their seats in the divan, where the sultan always
attended in person.

Aladdin's mother took the china dish, in which they had put the jewels
the day before, wrapped it in two fine napkins, and set forward for the
sultan's palace. When she came to the gates, the grand vizier, the other
viziers, and most distinguished lords of the court were just gone in;
but notwithstanding the crowd of people was great, she got into the
divan, a spacious hall, the entrance into which was very magnificent.
She placed herself just before the sultan, grand vizier, and the great
lords, who sat in council, on his right and left hand. Several causes
were called, according to their order, pleaded and adjudged, until the
time the divan generally broke up, when the sultan, rising, returned to
his apartment, attended by the grand vizier; the other viziers and
ministers of state then retired, as also did all those whose business
had called them thither.

Aladdin's mother, seeing the sultan retire, and all the people depart,
judged rightly that he would not sit again that day, and resolved to go
home; and on her arrival said, with much simplicity, "Son, I have seen
the sultan, and am very well persuaded he has seen me, too, for I placed
myself just before him; but he was so much taken up with those who
attended on all sides of him that I pitied him, and wondered at his
patience. At last I believe he was heartily tired, for he rose up
suddenly, and would not hear a great many who were ready prepared to
speak to him, but went away, at which I was well pleased, for indeed I
began to lose all patience, and was extremely fatigued with staying so
long. But there is no harm done; I will go again to-morrow; perhaps the
sultan may not be so busy."

The next morning she repaired to the sultan's palace with the present,
as early as the day before; but when she came there, she found the gates
of the divan shut. She went six times afterward on the days appointed,
placed herself always directly before the sultan, but with as little
success as the first morning.

On the sixth day, however, after the divan was broken up, when the
sultan returned to his own apartment, he said to his grand vizier; "I
have for some time observed a certain woman, who attends constantly
every day that I give audience, with something wrapped up in a napkin;
she always stands up from the beginning to the breaking up of the
audience, and affects to place herself just before me. If this woman
comes to our next audience, do not fail to call her, that I may hear
what she has to say." The grand vizier made answer by lowering his hand,
and then lifting it up above his head, signifying his willingness to
lose it if he failed.

On the next audience day, when Aladdin's mother went to the divan, and
placed herself in front of the sultan as usual, the grand vizier
immediately called the chief of the mace-bearers, and pointing to her
bade him bring her before the sultan. The old woman at once followed the
mace-bearer, and when she reached the sultan bowed her head down to the
carpet which covered the platform of the throne, and remained in that
posture until he bade her rise, which she had no sooner done, than he
said to her, "Good woman, I have observed you to stand many days from
the beginning to the rising of the divan; what business brings you
here?"

After these words, Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time;
and when she arose, said, "Monarch of monarchs, I beg of you to pardon
the boldness of my petition, and to assure me of your pardon and
forgiveness." "Well," replied the sultan, "I will forgive you, be it
what it may, and no hurt shall come to you; speak boldly."

When Aladdin's mother had taken all these precautions, for fear of the
sultan's anger, she told him faithfully the errand on which her son had
sent her, and the event which led to his making so bold a request in
spite of all her remonstrances.

The sultan hearkened to this discourse without showing the least anger;
but before he gave her any answer, asked her what she had brought tied
up in the napkin. She took the china dish which she had set down at the
foot of the throne, untied it, and presented it to the sultan.

The sultan's amazement and surprise were inexpressible, when he saw so
many large, beautiful and valuable jewels collected in the dish. He
remained for some time lost in admiration. At last, when he had
recovered himself, he received the present from Aladdin's mother's hand;
saying, "How rich, how beautiful!" After he had admired and handled all
the jewels one after another, he turned to his grand vizier, and showing
him the dish, said, "Behold, admire, wonder! and confess that your eyes
never beheld jewels so rich and beautiful before." The vizier was
charmed. "Well," continued the sultan, "what sayest thou to such a
present? Is it not worthy of the princess my daughter? And ought I not
to bestow her on one who values her at so great a price?" "I cannot but
own," replied the grand vizier, "that the present is worthy of the
princess; but I beg of your majesty to grant me three months before you
come to a final resolution. I hope, before that time, my son, whom you
have regarded with your favour, will be able to make a nobler present
than this Aladdin, who is an entire stranger to your majesty."

The sultan granted his request, and he said to the old woman, "Good
woman, go home, and tell your son that I agree to the proposal you have
made me; but I cannot marry the princess my daughter for three months;
at the expiration of that time come again."

Aladdin's mother returned home much more gratified than she had
expected, and told her son with much joy the condescending answer she
had received from the sultan's own mouth; and that she was to come to
the divan again that day three months.

Aladdin thought himself the most happy of all men at hearing this news,
and thanked his mother for the pains she had taken in the affair, the
good success of which was of so great importance to his peace, that he
counted every day, week, and even hour as it passed. When two of the
three months were passed, his mother one evening, having no oil in the
house, went out to buy some, and found a general rejoicing--the houses
dressed with foliage, silks, and carpeting, and every one striving to
show their joy according to their ability. The streets were crowded with
officers in habits of ceremony, mounted on horses richly caparisoned,
each attended by a great many footmen. Aladdin's mother asked the oil
merchant what was the meaning of all this preparation of public
festivity. "Whence came you, good woman," said he, "that you don't know
that the grand vizier's son is to marry the Princess Buddir al Buddoor,
the sultan's daughter, to-night? She will presently return from the
bath; and these officers whom you see are to assist at the cavalcade to
the palace, where the ceremony is to be solemnised."

Aladdin's mother, on hearing these news, ran home very quickly. "Child,"
cried she, "you are undone! the sultan's fine promises will come to
nought. This night the grand vizier's son is to marry the Princess
Buddir al Buddoor."

At this account, Aladdin was thunderstruck, and he bethought himself of
the lamp, and of the genie who had promised to obey him; and without
indulging in idle words against the sultan, the vizier, or his son, he
determined, if possible, to prevent the marriage.

When Aladdin had got into his chamber, he took the lamp, rubbed it in
the same place as before, when immediately the genie appeared, and said
to him, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave;
I, and the other slaves of the lamp." "Hear me," said Aladdin; "thou
hast hitherto obeyed me, but now I am about to impose on thee a harder
task. The sultan's daughter, who was promised me as my bride, is this
night married to the son of the grand vizier. Bring them both hither to
me immediately they retire to their bedchamber."

"Master," replied the genie, "I obey you."

Aladdin supped with his mother as was their wont, and then went to his
own apartment, and sat up to await the return of the genie, according to
his commands.

In the mean time the festivities in honour of the princess's marriage
were conducted in the sultan's palace with great magnificence. The
ceremonies were at last brought to a conclusion, and the princess and
the son of the vizier retired to the bedchamber prepared for them. No
sooner had they entered it, and dismissed their attendants, than the
genie, the faithful slave of the lamp, to the great amazement and alarm
of the bride and bridegroom, took up the bed, and by an agency invisible
to them, transported it in an instant into Aladdin's chamber, where he
set it down. "Remove the bridegroom," said Aladdin to the genie, "and
keep him a prisoner till to-morrow dawn, and then return with him here."
On Aladdin being left alone with the princess, he endeavoured to assuage
her fears, and explained to her the treachery practiced upon him by the
sultan her father. He then laid himself down beside her, putting a drawn
scimitar between them, to show that he was determined to secure her
safety, and to treat her with the utmost possible respect. At break of
day, the genie appeared at the appointed hour, bringing back the
bridegroom, whom by breathing upon he had left motionless and entranced
at the door of Aladdin's chamber during the night, and at Aladdin's
command transported the couch with the bride and bridegroom on it, by
the same invisible agency, into the palace of the sultan.

At the instant that the genie had set down the couch with the bride and
bridegroom in their own chamber, the sultan came to the door to offer
his good wishes to his daughter. The grand vizier's son, who was almost
perished with cold, by standing in his thin under-garment all night, no
sooner heard the knocking at the door than he got out of bed, and ran
into the robing-chamber, where he had undressed himself the night
before.

The sultan having opened the door, went to the bedside, kissed the
princess on the forehead, but was extremely surprised to see her look so
melancholy. She only cast at him a sorrowful look, expressive of great
affliction. He suspected there was something extraordinary in this
silence, and thereupon went immediately to the sultaness's apartment,
told her in what a state he found the princess, and how she had received
him. "Sire," said the sultaness, "I will go and see her; she will not
receive me in the same manner."

The princess received her mother with sighs and tears, and signs of deep
dejection. At last, upon her pressing on her the duty of telling her all
her thoughts, she gave to the sultaness a precise description of all
that happened to her during the night; on which the sultaness enjoined
on her the necessity of silence and discretion, as no one would give
credence to so strange a tale. The grand vizier's son, elated with the
honour of being the sultan's son-in-law, kept silence on his part, and
the events of the night were not allowed to cast the least gloom on the
festivities on the following day, in continued celebration of the royal
marriage.

When night came, the bride and bridegroom were again attended to their
chamber with the same ceremonies as on the preceding evening. Aladdin,
knowing that this would be so, had already given his commands to the
genie of the lamp; and no sooner were they alone than their bed was
removed in the same mysterious manner as on the preceding evening; and
having passed the night in the same unpleasant way, they were in the
morning conveyed to the palace of the sultan. Scarcely had they been
replaced in their apartment, when the sultan came to make his
compliments to his daughter, when the princess could no longer conceal
from him the unhappy treatment she had been subject to, and told him all
that had happened as she had already related it to her mother. The
sultan, on hearing these strange tidings, consulted with the grand
vizier; and finding from him that his son had been subjected to even
worse treatment by an invisible agency, he determined to declare the
marriage to be cancelled, and all the festivities, which were yet to
last for several days, to be countermanded and terminated.

This sudden change in the mind of the sultan gave rise to various
speculations and reports. Nobody but Aladdin knew the secret, and he
kept it with the most scrupulous silence; and neither the sultan nor the
grand vizier, who had forgotten Aladdin and his request, had the least
thought that he had any hand in the strange adventures that befell the
bride and bridegroom.

On the very day that the three months contained in the sultan's promise
expired, the mother of Aladdin again went to the palace, and stood in
the same place in the divan. The sultan knew her again, and directed his
vizier to have her brought before him.

After having prostrated herself, she made answer, in reply to the
sultan: "Sire, I come at the end of three months to ask of you the
fulfillment of the promise you made to my son." The sultan little
thought the request of Aladdin's mother was made to him in earnest, or
that he would hear any more of the matter. He therefore took counsel
with his vizier, who suggested that the sultan should attach such
conditions to the marriage that no one of the humble condition of
Aladdin could possibly fulfill. In accordance with this suggestion of
the vizier, the sultan replied to the mother of Aladdin: "Good woman, it
is true sultans ought to abide by their word, and I am ready to keep
mine, by making your son happy in marriage with the princess my
daughter. But as I cannot marry her without some further proof of your
son being able to support her in royal state, you may tell him I will
fulfill my promise as soon as he shall send me forty trays of massy
gold, full of the same sort of jewels you have already made me a present
of, and carried by the like number of black slaves, who shall be led by
as many young and handsome white slaves, all dressed magnificently. On
these conditions I am ready to bestow the princess my daughter upon him;
therefore, good woman, go and tell him so, and I will wait till you
bring me his answer."

Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time before the sultan's
throne, and retired. On her way home, she laughed within herself at her
son's foolish imagination. "Where," said she, "can he get so many large
gold trays, and such precious stones to fill them? It is altogether out
of his power, and I believe he will not be much pleased with my embassy
this time." When she came home, full of these thoughts, she told Aladdin
all the circumstances of her interview with the sultan, and the
conditions on which he consented to the marriage. "The sultan expects
your answer immediately," said she; and then added, laughing, "I believe
he may wait long enough!"

"Not so long, mother, as you imagine," replied Aladdin, "This demand is
a mere trifle, and will prove no bar to my marriage with the princess. I
will prepare at once to satisfy his request."

Aladdin retired to his own apartment and summoned the genie of the lamp,
and required him to prepare and present the gift immediately, before the
sultan closed his morning audience, according to the terms in which it
had been prescribed. The genie professed his obedience to the owner of
the lamp, and disappeared. Within a very short time, a train of forty
black slaves, led by the same number of white slaves, appeared opposite
the house in which Aladdin lived. Each black slave carried on his head a
basin of massy gold, full of pearls, diamonds, rubies, and emeralds.
Aladdin then addressed his mother: "Madam, pray lose no time; before the
sultan and the divan rise, I would have you return to the palace with
this present as the dowry demanded for the princess, that he may judge
by my diligence and exactness of the ardent and sincere desire I have to
procure myself the honour of this alliance."

As soon as this magnificent procession, with Aladdin's mother at its
head, had begun to march from Aladdin's house, the whole city was filled
with the crowds of people desirous to see so grand a sight. The graceful
bearing, elegant form, and wonderful likeness of each slave; their grave
walk at an equal distance from each other, the lustre of their jewelled
girdles, and the brilliancy of the aigrettes of precious stones in their
turbans, excited the greatest admiration in the spectators. As they had
to pass through several streets to the palace, the whole length of the
way was lined with files of spectators. Nothing, indeed, was ever seen
so beautiful and brilliant in the sultan's palace, and the richest robes
of the emirs of his court were not to be compared to the costly dresses
of these slaves, whom they supposed to be kings.

As the sultan, who had been informed of their approach, had given orders
for them to be admitted, they met with no obstacle, but went into the
divan in regular order, one part turning to the right and the other to
the left. After they were all entered, and had formed a semicircle
before the sultan's throne, the black slaves laid the golden trays on
the carpet, prostrated themselves, touching the carpet with their
foreheads, and at the same time the white slaves did the same. When they
rose, the black slaves uncovered the trays, and then all stood with
their arms crossed over their breasts.

In the mean time, Aladdin's mother advanced to the foot of the throne,
and having prostrated herself, said to the sultan, "Sire, my son knows
this present is much below the notice of Princess Buddir al Buddoor; but
hopes, nevertheless, that your majesty will accept of it, and make it
agreeable to the princess, and with the greater confidence since he has
endeavoured to conform to the conditions you were pleased to impose."

The sultan, overpowered at the sight of such more than royal
magnificence, replied without hesitation to the words of Aladdin's
mother: "Go and tell your son that I wait with open arms to embrace him;
and the more haste he makes to come and receive the princess my daughter
from my hands, the greater pleasure he will do me." As soon as Aladdin's
mother had retired, the sultan put an end to the audience; and rising
from his throne ordered that the princess's attendants should come and
carry the trays into their mistress's apartment, whither he went himself
to examine them with her at his leisure. The fourscore slaves were
conducted into the palace; and the sultan, telling the princess of their
magnificent apparel, ordered them to be brought before her apartment,
that she might see through the lattices he had not exaggerated in his
account of them.

In the meantime Aladdin's mother reached home, and showed in her air and
countenance the good news she brought to her son. "My son," said she,
"you may rejoice you are arrived at the height of your desires. The
sultan has declared that you shall marry the Princess Buddir al Buddoor.
He waits for you with impatience."

Aladdin, enraptured with this news, made his mother very little reply,
but retired to his chamber. There he rubbed his lamp, and the obedient
genie appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "convey me at once to a bath, and
supply me with the richest and most magnificent robe ever worn by a
monarch." No sooner were the words out of his mouth than the genie
rendered him, as well as himself, invisible, and transported him into a
bath of the finest marble of all sorts of colours; where he was
undressed, without seeing by whom, in a magnificent and spacious hall.
He was then well rubbed and washed with various scented waters. After he
had passed through several degrees of heat, he came out quite a
different man from what he was before. His skin was clear as that of a
child, his body lightsome and free; and when he returned into the hall,
he found, instead of his own poor raiment, a robe, the magnificence of
which astonished him. The genie helped him to dress, and when he had
done, transported him back to his own chamber, where he asked him if he
had any other commands. "Yes," answered Aladdin, "bring me a charger
that surpasses in beauty and goodness the best in the sultan's stables;
with a saddle, bridle, and other caparisons to correspond with his
value. Furnish also twenty slaves, as richly clothed as those who
carried the present to the sultan, to walk by my side and follow me, and
twenty more to go before me in two ranks. Besides these, bring my mother
six women slaves to attend her, as richly dressed at least as any of the
Princess Buddir al Buddoor's, each carrying a complete dress fit for any
sultaness. I want also ten thousand pieces of gold in ten purses; go,
and make haste."

As soon as Aladdin had given these orders, the genie disappeared, but
presently returned with the horse, the forty slaves, ten of whom carried
each a purse containing ten thousand pieces of gold, and six women
slaves, each carrying on her head a different dress for Aladdin's
mother, wrapt up in a piece of silver tissue, and presented them all to
Aladdin.

He presented the six women slaves to his mother, telling her they were
her slaves, and that the dresses they had brought were for her use. Of
the ten purses Aladdin took four, which he gave to his mother, telling
her, those were to supply her with necessaries; the other six he left in
the hands of the slaves who brought them, with an order to throw them by
handfuls among the people as they went to the sultan's palace. The six
slaves who carried the purses he ordered likewise to march before him,
three on the right hand and three on the left.

When Aladdin had thus prepared himself for his first interview with the
sultan, he dismissed the genie, and immediately mounting his charger,
began his march, and though he never was on horseback before, appeared
with a grace the most experienced horseman might envy. The innumerable
concourse of people through whom he passed made the air echo with their
acclamations, especially every time the six slaves who carried the
purses threw handfuls of gold among the populace.

On Aladdin's arrival at the palace, the sultan was surprised to find him
more richly and magnificently robed than he had ever been himself, and
was impressed with his good looks and dignity of manner, which were so
different from what he expected in the son of one so humble as Aladdin's
mother. He embraced him with all the demonstrations of joy, and when he
would have fallen at his feet, held him by the hand, and made him sit
near his throne. He shortly after led him amidst the sounds of trumpets,
hautboys, and all kinds of music, to a magnificent entertainment, at
which the sultan and Aladdin ate by themselves, and the great lords of
the court, according to their rank and dignity, sat at different tables.
After the feast, the sultan sent for the chief cadi, and commanded him
to draw up a contract of marriage between the Princess Buddir al Buddoor
and Aladdin. When the contract had been drawn, the sultan asked Aladdin
if he would stay in the palace and complete the ceremonies of the
marriage that day. "Sire," said Aladdin, "though great is my impatience
to enter on the honour granted me by your majesty, yet I beg you to
permit me first to build a palace worthy to receive the princess your
daughter. I pray you to grant me sufficient ground near your palace, and
I will have it completed with the utmost expedition." The sultan granted
Aladdin his request, and again embraced him. After which he took his
leave with as much politeness as if he had been bred up and had always
lived at court.

Aladdin returned home in the order he had come, amidst the acclamations
of the people, who wished him all happiness and prosperity. As soon as
he dismounted, he retired to his own chamber, took the lamp, and
summoned the genie as usual, who professed his allegiance. "Genie," said
Aladdin, "build me a palace fit to receive the Princess Buddir al
Buddoor. Let its materials be made of nothing less than porphyry,
jasper, agate, lapis lazuli, and the finest marble. Let its walls be
massive gold and silver bricks laid alternately. Let each front contain
six windows, and let the lattices of these (except one, which must be
left unfinished) be enriched with diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, so
that they shall exceed everything of the kind ever seen in the world.
Let there be an inner and outer court in front of the palace, and a
spacious garden; but above all things, provide a safe treasure-house,
and fill it with gold and silver. Let there be also kitchens and
storehouses, stables full of the finest horses, with their equerries and
grooms, and hunting equipage, officers, attendants, and slaves, both men
and women, to form a retinue for the princess and myself. Go and execute
my wishes."

When Aladdin gave these commands to the genie, the sun was set. The next
morning at daybreak the genie presented himself, and, having obtained
Aladdin's consent, transported him in a moment to the palace he had
made. The genie led him through all the apartments, where he found
officers and slaves, habited according to their rank and the services to
which they were appointed. The genie then showed him the treasury, which
was opened by a treasurer, where Aladdin saw large vases of different
sizes, piled up to the top with money, ranged all round the chamber. The
genie thence led him to the stables, where were some of the finest
horses in the world, and the grooms busy in dressing them; from thence
they went to the storehouses, which were filled with all things
necessary, both for food and ornament.

When Aladdin had examined every portion of the palace, and particularly
the hall with the four-and-twenty windows, and found it far to exceed
his fondest expectations, he said, "Genie, there is one thing wanting, a
fine carpet for the princess to walk upon from the sultan's palace to
mine. Lay one down immediately." The genie disappeared, and Aladdin saw
what he desired executed in an instant. The genie then returned, and
carried him to his own home.

When the sultan's porters came to open the gates, they were amazed to
find what had been an unoccupied garden filled up with a magnificent
palace, and a splendid carpet extending to it all the way from the
sultan's palace. They told the strange tidings to the grand vizier, who
informed the sultan, who exclaimed, "It must be Aladdin's palace, which
I gave him leave to build for my daughter. He has wished to surprise us,
and let us see what wonders can be done in only one night."

Aladdin, on his being conveyed by the genie to his own home, requested
his mother to go to the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, and tell her that
the palace would be ready for her reception in the evening. She went,
attended by her women slaves, in the same order as on the preceding day.
Shortly after her arrival at the princess's apartment, the sultan
himself came in, and was surprised to find her, whom he knew as his
suppliant at his divan in such humble guise, to be now more richly and
sumptuously attired than his own daughter. This gave him a higher
opinion of Aladdin, who took such care of his mother, and made her share
his wealth and honours. Shortly after her departure, Aladdin, mounting
his horse, and attended by his retinue of magnificent attendants, left
his paternal home forever, and went to the palace in the same pomp as on
the day before. Nor did he forget to take with him the Wonderful Lamp,
to which he owed all his good fortune, nor to wear the Ring which was
given him as a talisman. The sultan entertained Aladdin with the utmost
magnificence, and at night, on the conclusion of the marriage
ceremonies, the princess took leave of the sultan her father. Bands of
music led the procession, followed by a hundred state ushers, and the
like number of black mutes, in two files, with their officers at their
head. Four hundred of the sultan's young pages carried flambeaux on each
side, which, together with the illuminations of the sultan's and
Aladdin's palaces, made it as light as day. In this order the princess,
conveyed in her litter, and accompanied also by Aladdin's mother,
carried in a superb litter and attended by her women slaves, proceeded
on the carpet which was spread from the sultan's palace to that of
Aladdin. On her arrival Aladdin was ready to receive her at the
entrance, and led her into a large hall, illuminated with an infinite
number of wax candles, where a noble feast was served up. The dishes
were of massy gold, and contained the most delicate viands. The vases,
basins, and goblets were gold also, and of exquisite workmanship, and
all the other ornaments and embellishments of the hall were answerable
to this display. The princess, dazzled to see so much riches collected
in one place, said to Aladdin, "I thought, prince, that nothing in the
world was so beautiful as the sultan my father's palace, but the sight
of this hall alone is sufficient to show I was deceived."

When the supper was ended, there entered a company of female dancers,
who performed, according to the custom of the country, singing at the
same time verses in praise of the bride and bridegroom. About midnight
Aladdin's mother conducted the bride to the nuptial apartment, and he
soon after retired.

The next morning the attendants of Aladdin presented themselves to dress
him, and brought him another habit, as rich and magnificent as that worn
the day before. He then ordered one of the horses to be got ready,
mounted him, and went in the midst of a large troop of slaves to the
sultan's palace to entreat him to take a repast in the princess's
palace, attended by his grand vizier and all the lords of his court. The
sultan consented with pleasure, rose up immediately, and, preceded by
the principal officers of his palace, and followed by all the great
lords of his court, accompanied Aladdin.

The nearer the sultan approached Aladdin's palace, the more he was
struck with its beauty; but when he entered it, came into the hall, and
saw the windows, enriched with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, all large
perfect stones, he was completely surprised, and said to his son-in-law,
"This palace is one of the wonders of the world; for where in all the
world besides shall we find walls built of massy gold and silver, and
diamonds, rubies, and emeralds composing the windows? But what most
surprises me is, that a hall of this magnificence should be left with
one of its windows incomplete and unfinished." "Sire," answered Aladdin,
"the omission was by design, since I wished that you should have the
glory of finishing this hall." "I take your intention kindly," said the
sultan, "and will give orders about it immediately."

After the sultan had finished this magnificent entertainment, provided
for him and for his court by Aladdin, he was informed that the jewellers
and goldsmiths attended; upon which he returned to the hall, and showed
them the window which was unfinished. "I sent for you," said he, "to fit
up this window in as great perfection as the rest. Examine them well,
and make all the dispatch you can."

The jewellers and goldsmiths examined the three-and-twenty windows with
great attention, and after they had consulted together, to know what
each could furnish, they returned, and presented themselves before the
sultan, whose principal jeweller undertaking to speak for the rest,
said, "Sire, we are all willing to exert our utmost care and industry to
obey you; but among us all we cannot furnish jewels enough for so great
a work." "I have more than are necessary," said the sultan; "come to my
palace, and you shall choose what may answer your purpose."

When the sultan returned to his palace, he ordered his jewels to be
brought out, and the jewellers took a great quantity, particularly those
Aladdin had made him a present of, which they soon used, without making
any great advance in their work. They came again several times for more,
and in a month's time had not finished half their work. In short, they
used all the jewels the sultan had, and borrowed of the vizier, but yet
the work was not half done.

Aladdin, who knew that all the sultan's endeavours to make this window
like the rest were in vain, sent for the jewellers and goldsmiths, and
not only commanded them to desist from their work, but ordered them to
undo what they had begun, and to carry all their jewels back to the
sultan and to the vizier. They undid in a few hours what they had been
six weeks about, and retired, leaving Aladdin alone in the hall. He took
the lamp, which he carried about him, rubbed it, and presently the genie
appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I ordered thee to leave one of the
four-and-twenty windows of this hall imperfect, and thou hast executed
my commands punctually; now I would have thee make it like the rest."
The genie immediately disappeared. Aladdin went out of the hall, and
returning soon after, found the window, as he wished it to be, like the
others.

In the mean time, the jewellers and goldsmiths repaired to the palace,
and were introduced into the sultan's presence; where the chief jeweller
presented the precious stones which he had brought back. The sultan
asked them if Aladdin had given them any reason for so doing, and they
answering that he had given them none, he ordered a horse to be brought,
which he mounted, and rode to his son-in-law's palace, with some few
attendants on foot, to inquire why he had ordered the completion of the
window to be stopped. Aladdin met him at the gate, and without giving
any reply to his inquiries conducted him to the grand saloon, where the
sultan, to his great surprise, found the window, which was left
imperfect, to correspond exactly with the others. He fancied at first
that he was mistaken, and examined the two windows on each side, and
afterward all the four-and-twenty; but when he was convinced that the
window which several workmen had been so long about was finished in so
short a time, he embraced Aladdin and kissed him between his eyes. "My
son," said he, "what a man you are to do such surprising things always
in the twinkling of an eye! there is not your fellow in the world; the
more I know, the more I admire you."

The sultan returned to the palace, and after this went frequently to the
window to contemplate and admire the wonderful palace of his son-in-law.

Aladdin did not confine himself in his palace, but went with much state,
sometimes to one mosque, and sometimes to another, to prayers, or to
visit the grand vizier or the principal lords of the court. Every time
he went out, he caused two slaves, who walked by the side of his horse,
to throw handfuls of money among the people as he passed through the
streets and squares. This generosity gained him the love and blessings
of the people, and it was common for them to swear by his head. Thus
Aladdin, while he paid all respect to the sultan, won by his affable
behaviour and liberality the affections of the people.

Aladdin had conducted himself in this manner several years, when the
African magician, who had for some years dismissed him from his
recollection, determined to inform himself with certainty whether he
perished, as he supposed, in the subterranean cave or not. After he had
resorted to a long course of magic ceremonies, and had formed a
horoscope by which to ascertain Aladdin's fate, what was his surprise to
find the appearances to declare that Aladdin, instead of dying in the
cave, had made his escape, and was living in royal splendour, by the aid
of the genie of the wonderful lamp!

On the very next day, the magician set out and travelled with the utmost
haste to the capital of China, where, on his arrival, he took up his
lodgings in a khan.

He then quickly learnt about the wealth, charities, happiness, and
splendid palace of Prince Aladdin. Directly he saw the wonderful fabric,
he knew that none but the genies, the slaves of the lamp, could have
performed such wonders, and, piqued to the quick at Aladdin's high
estate, he returned to the khan.

On his return he had recourse to an operation of geomancy to find out
where the lamp was--whether Aladdin carried it about with him, or where
he left it. The result of his consultation informed him, to his great
joy, that the lamp was in the palace. "Well," said he, rubbing his hands
in glee, "I shall have the lamp, and I shall make Aladdin return to his
original mean condition."

The next day the magician learnt, from the chief superintendent of the
khan where he lodged, that Aladdin had gone on a hunting expedition,
which was to last for eight days, of which only three had expired. The
magician wanted to know no more, He resolved at once on his plans. He
went to a coppersmith, and asked for a dozen copper lamps: the master of
the shop told him he had not so many by him, but if he would have
patience till the next day, he would have them ready. The magician
appointed his time, and desired him to take care that they should be
handsome and well polished.

The next day the magician called for the twelve lamps, paid the man his
full price, put them into a basket hanging on his arm, and went directly
to Aladdin's palace. As he approached, he began crying, "Who will
exchange old lamps for new ones?" As he went along, a crowd of children
collected, who hooted, and thought him, as did all who chanced to be
passing by, a madman or a fool, to offer to change new lamps for old
ones.

The African magician regarded not their scoffs, hootings, or all they
could say to him, but still continued crying, "Who will change old lamps
for new ones?" He repeated this so often, walking backward and forward
in front of the palace, that the princess, who was then in the hall with
the four-and-twenty windows, hearing a man cry something, and seeing a
great mob crowding about him, sent one of her women slaves to know what
he cried.

The slave returned, laughing so heartily that the princess rebuked her.
"Madam," answered the slave, laughing still, "who can forbear laughing,
to see an old man with a basket on his arm, full of fine new lamps,
asking to change them for old ones? the children and mob crowding about
him, so that he can hardly stir, make all the noise they can in derision
of him."

Another female slave hearing this, said, "Now you speak of lamps, I know
not whether the princess may have observed it, but there is an old one
upon a shelf of the Prince Aladdin's robing room, and whoever owns it
will not be sorry to find a new one in its stead. If the princess
chooses, she may have the pleasure of trying if this old man is so silly
as to give a new lamp for an old one, without taking anything for the
exchange."

The princess, who knew not the value of this lamp, and the interest that
Aladdin had to keep it safe, entered into the pleasantry, and commanded
a slave to take it and make the exchange. The slave obeyed, went out of
the hall, and no sooner got to the palace gates than he saw the African
magician, called to him, and showing him the old lamp, said, "Give me a
new lamp for this."

The magician never doubted but this was the lamp he wanted. There could
be no other such in this palace, where every utensil was gold or silver.
He snatched it eagerly out of the slave's hand, and thrusting it as far
as he could into his breast, offered him his basket, and bade him choose
which he liked best. The slave picked out one and carried it to the
princess; but the change was no sooner made than the place rung with the
shouts of the children, deriding the magician's folly.

The African magician stayed no longer near the palace, nor cried any
more, "New lamps for old ones," but made the best of his way to his
khan. His end was answered, and by his silence he got rid of the
children and the mob.

As soon as he was out of sight of the two palaces, he hastened down the
least-frequented streets; and having no more occasion for his lamps or
basket, set all down in a spot where nobody saw him; then going down
another street or two, he walked till he came to one of the city gates,
and pursuing his way through the suburbs, which were very extensive, at
length reached a lonely spot, where he stopped till the darkness of the
night, as the most suitable time for the design he had in contemplation.
When it became quite dark, he pulled the lamp out of his breast and
rubbed it. At that summons the genie appeared, and said, "What wouldst
thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and the slave of all
those who have that lamp in their hands, both I and the other slaves of
the lamp." "I command thee," replied the magician, "to transport me
immediately, and the palace which thou and the other slaves of the lamp
have built in this city, with all the people in it, to Africa." The
genie made no reply, but with the assistance of the other genies, the
slaves of the lamp, immediately transported him and the palace, entire,
to the spot whither he had been desired to convey it.

Early the next morning, when the sultan, according to custom, went to
contemplate and admire Aladdin's place, his amazement was unbounded to
find that it could nowhere be seen. He could not comprehend how so large
a palace which he had seen plainly every day for some years, should
vanish so soon, and not leave the least remains behind. In his
perplexity he ordered the grand vizier to be sent for with expedition.

The grand vizier, who, in secret, bore no good will to Aladdin,
intimated his suspicion that the palace was built by magic, and that
Aladdin had made his hunting excursion an excuse for the removal of his
palace with the same suddenness with which it had been erected. He
induced the sultan to send a detachment of his guard, and to have
Aladdin seized as a prisoner of state. On his son-in-law being brought
before him, he would not hear a word from him, but ordered him to be put
to death. The decree caused so much discontent among the people, whose
affection Aladdin had secured by his largesses and charities, that the
sultan, fearful of an insurrection, was obliged to grant him his life.
When Aladdin found himself at liberty, he again addressed the sultan:
"Sire, I pray you to let me know the crime by which I have thus lost the
favour of thy countenance." "Your crime!" answered the sultan, "wretched
man! do you not know it? Follow me, and I will show you." The sultan
then took Aladdin into the apartment from whence he was wont to look at
and admire his palace, and said, "You ought to know where your palace
stood; look, mind, and tell me what has become of it." Aladdin did so,
and being utterly amazed at the loss of his palace, was speechless. At
last recovering himself, he said, "It is true, I do not see the palace.
It is vanished; but I had no concern in its removal. I beg you to give
me forty days, and if in that time I cannot restore it, I will offer my
head to be disposed of at your pleasure." "I give you the time you ask,
but at the end of the forty days, forget not to present yourself before
me."

Aladdin went out of the sultan's palace in a condition of exceeding
humiliation. The lords who had courted him in the days of his splendour,
now declined to have any communication with him. For three days he
wandered about the city, exciting the wonder and compassion of the
multitude by asking everybody he met if they had seen his palace, or
could tell him anything of it. On the third day he wandered into the
country, and as he was approaching a river, he fell down the bank with
so much violence that he rubbed the ring which the magician had given
him so hard by holding on the rock to save himself, that immediately the
same genie appeared whom he had seen in the cave where the magician had
left him. "What wouldst thou have?" said the genie, "I am ready to obey
thee as thy slave, and the slave of all those that have that ring on
their finger; both I and the other slaves of the ring."

Aladdin, agreeably surprised at an offer of help so little expected,
replied, "Genie, show me where the palace I caused to be built now
stands, or transport it back where it first stood." "Your command,"
answered the genie, "is not wholly in my power; I am only the slave of
the ring, and not of the lamp." "I command thee, then," replied Aladdin,
"by the power of the ring, to transport me to the spot where my palace
stands, in what part of the world soever it may be." These words were no
sooner out of his mouth, than the genie transported him into Africa, to
the midst of a large plain, where his palace stood, at no great distance
from a city, and placing him exactly under the window of the princess's
apartment, left him.

Now it so happened that shortly after Aladdin had been transported by
the slave of the ring to the neighbourhood of his palace, that one of
the attendants of the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, looking through the
window, perceived him and instantly told her mistress. The princess, who
could not believe the joyful tidings, hastened herself to the window,
and seeing Aladdin, immediately opened it. The noise of opening the
window made Aladdin turn his head that way, and perceiving the princess,
he saluted her with an air that expressed his joy. "To lose no time,"
said she to him, "I have sent to have the private door opened for you;
enter and come up."

The private door, which was just under the princess's apartment, was
soon opened, and Aladdin conducted up into the chamber. It is impossible
to express the joy of both at seeing each other, after so cruel a
separation. After embracing and shedding tears of joy, they sat down,
and Aladdin said, "I beg of you, princess, to tell me what is become of
an old lamp which stood upon a shelf in my robing-chamber."

"Alas!" answered the princess, "I was afraid our misfortune might be
owing to that lamp; and what grieves me most is, that I have been the
cause of it. I was foolish enough to change the old lamp for a new one,
and the next morning I found myself in this unknown country, which I am
told is Africa."

"Princess," said Aladdin, interrupting her, "you have explained all by
telling me we are in Africa I desire you only to tell me if you know
where the old lamp now is." "The African magician carries it carefully
wrapt up in his bosom," said the princess; "and this I can assure you,
because he pulled it out before me, and showed it to me in triumph."

"Princess," said Aladdin, "I think I have found the means to deliver you
and to regain possession of the lamp, on which all my prosperity
depends; to execute this design it is necessary for me to go to the
town. I shall return by noon, and will then tell you what must be done
by you to insure success. In the mean time, I shall disguise myself, and
beg that the private door may be opened at the first knock."

When Aladdin was out of the palace, he looked round him on all sides,
and perceiving a peasant going into the country, hastened after him; and
when he had overtaken him, made a proposal to him to change clothes,
which the man agreed to. When they had made the exchange, the countryman
went about his business, and Aladdin entered the neighbouring city.
After traversing several streets, he came to that part of the town where
the merchants and artisans had their particular streets according to
their trades. He went into that of the druggists; and entering one of
the largest and best furnished shops, asked the druggist if he had a
certain powder, which he named.

The druggist, judging Aladdin by his habit to be very poor, told him he
had it, but that it was very dear; upon which Aladdin, penetrating his
thoughts, pulled out his purse, and showing him some gold, asked for
half a dram of the powder; which the druggist weighed and gave him,
telling him the price was a piece of gold. Aladdin put the money into
his hand, and hastened to the palace, which he entered at once by the
private door. When he came into the princess's apartments, he said to
her, "Princess, you must take your part in the scheme which I propose
for our deliverance. You must overcome your aversion to the magician,
and assume a most friendly manner toward him, and ask him to oblige you
by partaking of an entertainment in your apartments. Before he leaves,
ask him to exchange cups with you, which he, gratified at the honour you
do him, will gladly do, when you must give him the cup containing this
powder. On drinking it he will instantly fall asleep, and we will obtain
the lamp, whose slaves will do all our bidding, and restore us and the
palace to the capital of China."

The princess obeyed to the utmost her husband's instructions. She
assumed a look of pleasure on the next visit of the magician, and asked
him to an entertainment, which he most willingly accepted. At the close
of the evening, during which the princess had tried all she could to
please him, she asked him to exchange cups with her, and giving the
signal, had the drugged cup brought to her, which she gave to the
magician. He drank it out of compliment to the princess to the very last
drop, when he fell backward lifeless on the sofa.

The princess, in anticipation of the success of her scheme, had so
placed her women from the great hall to the foot of the staircase, that
the word was no sooner given that the African magician was fallen
backward, than the door was opened, and Aladdin admitted to the hall.
The princess rose from her seat, and ran, overjoyed, to embrace him; but
he stopped her, and said, "Princess, retire to your apartment; and let
me be left alone, while I endeavour to transport you back to China as
speedily as you were brought from thence."

When the princess, her women, and slaves were gone out of the hall,
Aladdin shut the door, and going directly to the dead body of the
magician, opened his vest, took out the lamp which was carefully wrapped
up, and rubbing it, the genie immediately appeared. "Genie," said
Aladdin, "I command thee to transport this palace instantly to the place
from whence it was brought hither." The genie bowed his head in token of
obedience, and disappeared. Immediately the palace was transported into
China, and its removal was only felt by two little shocks, the one when
it was lifted up, the other when it was set down, and both in a very
short interval of time.

On the morning after the restoration of Aladdin's palace, the sultan was
looking out of his window, and mourning over the fate of his daughter,
when he thought that he saw the vacancy created by the disappearance of
the palace to be again filled up.

On looking more attentively, he was convinced beyond the power of doubt
that it was his son-in-law's palace. Joy and gladness succeeded to
sorrow and grief. He at once ordered a horse to be saddled, which he
mounted that instant, thinking he could not make haste enough to the
place.

Aladdin rose that morning by daybreak, put on one of the most
magnificent habits his wardrobe afforded, and went up into the hall of
twenty-four windows, from whence he perceived the sultan approaching,
and received him at the foot of the great staircase, helping him to
dismount.

He led the sultan into the princess's apartment. The happy father
embraced her with tears of joy; and the princess, on her side, afforded
similar testimonies of her extreme pleasure. After a short interval,
devoted to mutual explanations of all that had happened, the sultan
restored Aladdin to his favour, and expressed his regret for the
apparent harshness with which he had treated him. "My son," said he, "be
not displeased at my proceedings against you; they arose from my
paternal love, and therefore you ought to forgive the excesses to which
it hurried me." "Sire," replied Aladdin, "I have not the least reason to
complain of your conduct, since you did nothing but what your duty
required. This infamous magician, the basest of men, was the sole cause
of my misfortune."

The African magician, who was thus twice foiled in his endeavour to ruin
Aladdin, had a younger brother, who was as skilful a magician as
himself, and exceeded him in wickedness and hatred of mankind. By mutual
agreement they communicated with each other once a year, however widely
separate might be their place of residence from each other. The younger
brother not having received as usual his annual communication, prepared
to take a horoscope and ascertain his brother's proceedings. He, as well
as his brother, always carried a geomantic square instrument about him;
he prepared the sand, cast the points, and drew the figures. On
examining the planetary crystal, he found that his brother was no longer
living, but had been poisoned; and by another observation, that he was
in the capital of the kingdom of China; also, that the person who had
poisoned him was of mean birth, though married to a princess, a sultan's
daughter.

When the magician had informed himself of his brother's fate, he
resolved immediately to revenge his death, and at once departed for
China; where, after crossing plains, rivers, mountains, deserts, and a
long tract of country without delay, he arrived after incredible
fatigues. When he came to the capital of China, he took a lodging at a
khan. His magic art soon revealed to him that Aladdin was the person who
had been the cause of the death of his brother. He had heard, too, all
the persons of repute in the city talking of a woman called Fatima, who
was retired from the world, and of the miracles she wrought. As he
fancied that this woman might be serviceable to him in the project he
had conceived, he made more minute inquiries, and requested to be
informed more particularly who that holy woman was, and what sort of
miracles she performed.

"What!" said the person whom he addressed, "have you never seen or heard
of her? She is the admiration of the whole town, for her fasting, her
austerities, and her exemplary life. Except Mondays and Fridays, she
never stirs out of her little cell; and on those days on which she comes
into the town she does an infinite deal of good; for there is not a
person who is diseased but she puts her hand on them and cures them."

Having ascertained the place where the hermitage of this holy woman was,
the magician went at night, and, plunging a poniard into her heart,
killed this good woman. In the morning he dyed his face of the same hue
as hers, and arraying himself in her garb, taking her veil, the large
necklace she wore round her waist, and her stick, went straight to the
palace of Aladdin.

As soon as the people saw the holy woman, as they imagined him to be,
they presently gathered about him in a great crowd. Some begged his
blessing, others kissed his hand, and others, more reserved, only the
hem of his garment; while others, suffering from disease, stooped for
him to lay his hands upon them; which he did, muttering some words in
form of prayer, and, in short, counterfeiting so well, that everybody
took him for the holy woman. He came at last to the square before
Aladdin's palace. The crowd and the noise were so great that the
princess, who was in the hall of four-and-twenty windows, heard it, and
asked what was the matter. One of her women told her it was a great
crowd of people collected about the holy woman to be cured of diseases
by the imposition of her hands.

The princess, who had long heard of this holy woman, but had never seen
her, was very desirous to have some conversation with her; which the
chief officer perceiving, told her it was an easy matter to bring her to
her, if she desired and commanded it; and the princess expressing her
wishes, he immediately sent four slaves for the pretended holy woman.

As soon as the crowd saw the attendants from the palace, they made way;
and the magician, perceiving also that they were coming for him,
advanced to meet them, overjoyed to find his plot succeed so well. "Holy
woman," said one of the slaves, "the princess wants to see you, and has
sent us for you." "The princess does me too great an honour," replied
the false Fatima; "I am ready to obey her command," and at the same time
followed the slaves to the palace.

When the pretended Fatima had made her obeisance, the princess said, "My
good mother, I have one thing to request, which you must not refuse me;
it is, to stay with me, that you may edify me with your way of living,
and that I may learn from your good example." "Princess," said the
counterfeit Fatima, "I beg of you not to ask what I cannot consent to
without neglecting my prayers and devotion." "That shall be no hindrance
to you," answered the princess; "I have a great many apartments
unoccupied; you shall choose which you like best, and have as much
liberty to perform your devotions as if you were in your own cell."

The magician, who really desired nothing more than to introduce himself
into the palace, where it would be a much easier matter for him to
execute his designs, did not long excuse himself from accepting the
obliging offer which the princess made him. "Princess," said he,
"whatever resolution a poor wretched woman as I am may have made to
renounce the pomp and grandeur of this world, I dare not presume to
oppose the will and commands of so pious and charitable a princess."

Upon this the princess, rising up, said, "Come with me, I will show you
what vacant apartments I have, that you may make choice of that you like
best." The magician followed the princess, and of all the apartments she
showed him, made choice of that which was the worst, saying that it was
too good for him, and that he only accepted it to please her.

Afterward the princess would have brought him back into the great hall
to make him dine with her; but he, considering that he should then be
obliged to show his face, which he had always taken care to conceal with
Fatima's veil, and fearing that the princess should find out that he was
not Fatima, begged of her earnestly to excuse him, telling her that he
never ate anything but bread and dried fruits, and desiring to eat that
slight repast in his own apartment. The princess granted his request,
saying, "You may be as free here, good mother, as if you were in your
own cell: I will order you a dinner, but remember I expect you as soon
as you have finished your repast."

After the princess had dined, and the false Fatima had been sent for by
one of the attendants, he again waited upon her. "My good mother," said
the princess, "I am overjoyed to see so holy a woman as yourself, who
will confer a blessing upon this palace. But now I am speaking of the
palace, pray how do you like it? And before I show it all to you, tell
me first what you think of this hall."

Upon this question, the counterfeit Fatima surveyed the hall from one
end to the other. When he had examined it well, he said to the princess,
"As far as such a solitary being as I am, who am unacquainted with what
the world calls beautiful, can judge, this hall is truly admirable;
there wants but one thing." "What is that, good mother?" demanded the
princess; "tell me, I conjure you. For my part, I always believed, and
have heard say, it wanted nothing; but if it does, it shall be
supplied."

"Princess," said the false Fatima, with great dissimulation, "forgive me
the liberty I have taken; but my opinion is, if it can be of any
importance, that if a roc's egg were hung up in the middle of the dome,
this hall would have no parallel in the four quarters of the world, and
your palace would be the wonder of the universe."

"My good mother," said the princess, "what is a roc, and where may one
get an egg?" "Princess," replied the pretended Fatima, "it is a bird of
prodigious size, which inhabits the summit of Mount Caucasus; the
architect who built your palace can get you one."

After the princess had thanked the false Fatima for what she believed
her good advice, she conversed with her upon other matters; but could
not forget the roc's egg, which she resolved to request of Aladdin when
next he should visit his apartments. He did so in the course of that
evening, and shortly after he entered, the princess thus addressed him:
"I always believed that our palace was the most superb, magnificent, and
complete in the world: but I will tell you now what it wants, and that
is a roc's egg hung up in the midst of the dome." "Princess," replied
Aladdin, "it is enough that you think it wants such an ornament; you
shall see by the diligence which I use in obtaining it, that there is
nothing which I would not do for your sake."

Aladdin left the Princess Buddir al Buddoor that moment, and went up
into the hall of four-and-twenty windows, where, pulling out of his
bosom the lamp, which after the danger he had been exposed to be always
carried about him, he rubbed it; upon which the genie immediately
appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I command thee, in the name of this
lamp, bring a roc's egg to be hung up in the middle of the dome of the
hall of the palace." Aladdin had no sooner pronounced these words, than
the hall shook as if ready to fall; and the genie said in a loud and
terrible voice, "Is it not enough that I and the other slaves of the
lamp have done everything for you, but you, by an unheard-of
ingratitude, must command me to bring my master, and hang him up in the
midst of this dome? This attempt deserves that you, the princess, and
the palace, should be immediately reduced to ashes; but you are spared
because this request does not come from yourself. Its true author is the
brother of the African magician, your enemy whom you have destroyed. He
is now in your palace, disguised in the habit of the holy woman Fatima,
whom he has murdered; at his suggestion your wife makes this pernicious
demand. His design is to kill you, therefore take care of yourself."
After these words the genie disappeared.

Aladdin resolved at once what to do. He returned to the princess's
apartment, and without mentioning a word of what had happened, sat down,
and complained of a great pain which had suddenly seized his head. On
hearing this, the princess told him how she had invited the holy Fatima
to stay with her, and that she was now in the palace; and at the request
of the prince, ordered her to be summoned to her at once.

When the pretended Fatima came, Aladdin said, "Come hither, good mother;
I am glad to see you here at so fortunate a time. I am tormented with a
violent pain in my head, and request your assistance, and hope you will
not refuse me that cure which you impart to afflicted persons." So
saying, he arose, but held down his head. The counterfeit Fatima
advanced toward him, with his hand all the time on a dagger concealed in
his girdle under his gown; which Aladdin, observing, he snatched the
weapon from his hand, pierced him to the heart with his own dagger, and
then pushed him down on the floor.

"My dear prince, what have you done?" cried the princess, in surprise.
"You have killed the holy woman!" "No, my princess," answered Aladdin
with emotion, "I have not killed Fatima, but a villain, who would have
assassinated me, if I had not prevented him. This wicked man," added he,
uncovering his face, "is the brother of the magician who attempted our
ruin. He has strangled the true Fatima, and disguised himself in her
clothes with intent to murder me." Aladdin then informed her how the
genie had told him these facts, and how narrowly she and the palace had
escaped destruction through his treacherous suggestion which had led to
her request.

Thus was Aladdin delivered from the persecution of the two brothers, who
were magicians. Within a few years afterward, the sultan died in a good
old age, and as he left no male children, the Princess Buddir al Buddoor
succeeded him, and she and Aladdin reigned together many years, and left
a numerous and illustrious posterity.




CHAPTER VI

THE HISTORY OF ALI BABA, AND OF THE FORTY ROBBERS KILLED BY ONE SLAVE


There once lived in a town of Persia two brothers, one named Cassim and
the other Ali Baba. Their father divided a small inheritance equally
between them. Cassim married a very rich wife, and became a wealthy
merchant. Ali Baba married a woman as poor as himself, and lived by
cutting wood, and bringing it upon three asses into the town, to sell.

One day, when Ali Baba was in the forest, and had just cut wood enough
to load his asses, he saw at a distance a great cloud of dust, which
seemed to approach him. He observed it with attention, and distinguished
soon after a body of horsemen, who he suspected might be robbers. He
determined to leave his asses to save himself. He climbed up a large
tree, planted on a high rock, whose branches were thick enough to
conceal him, and yet enabled him to see all that passed without being
discovered.

The troop, who were to the number of forty, all well mounted and armed,
came to the foot of the rock on which the tree stood, and there
dismounted Every man unbridled his horse, tied him to some shrub, and
hung about his neck a bag of corn which they brought behind them. Then
each of them took off his saddle-bag, which seemed to Ali Baba to be
full of gold and silver from its weight. One, whom he took to be their
captain, came under the tree in which Ali Baba was concealed; and making
his way through some shrubs, pronounced these words: "Open, Sesame!"
 As soon as the captain of the
robbers had thus spoken, a door opened in the rock; and after he had
made all his troop enter before him, he followed them, when the door
shut again of itself.

The robbers stayed some time within the rock, during which Ali Baba,
fearful of being caught, remained in the tree.

At last the door opened again, and as the captain went in last, so he
came out first, and stood to see them all pass by him; when Ali Baba
heard him make the door close by pronouncing these words, "Shut,
Sesame!" Every man at once went and bridled his horse, fastened his
wallet, and mounted again. When the captain saw them all ready, he put
himself at their head, and they returned the way they had come.

Ali Baba followed them with his eyes as far as he could see them; and
afterward stayed a considerable time before he descended. Remembering
the words the captain of the robbers used to cause the door to open and
shut, he had the curiosity to try if his pronouncing them would have the
same effect. Accordingly, he went among the shrubs, and perceiving the
door concealed behind them, stood before it, and said, "Open, Sesame!"
The door instantly flew wide open.

Ali Baba, who expected a dark, dismal cavern, was surprised to see a
well-lighted and spacious chamber, which received the light from an
opening at the top of the rock, and in which were all sorts of
provisions, rich bales of silk, stuff, brocade, and valuable carpeting,
piled upon one another; gold and silver ingots in great heaps, and money
in bags. The sight of all these riches made him suppose that this cave
must have been occupied for ages by robbers, who had succeeded one
another.

Ali Baba went boldly into the cave, and collected as much of the gold
coin, which was in bags, as he thought his three asses could carry. When
he had loaded them with the bags, he laid wood over them in such a
manner that they could not be seen. When he had passed in and out as
often as he wished, he stood before the door, and pronouncing the words,
"Shut, Sesame!" the door closed of itself. He then made the best of his
way to town.

When Ali Baba got home, he drove his asses into a little yard, shut the
gates very carefully, threw off the wood that covered the panniers,
carried the bags into his house, and ranged them in order before his
wife. He then emptied the bags, which raised such a great heap of gold
as dazzled his wife's eyes, and then he told her the whole adventure
from beginning to end, and, above all, recommended her to keep it
secret.

The wife rejoiced greatly in their good fortune, and would count all the
gold piece by piece. "Wife," replied Ali Baba, "you do not know what you
undertake, when you pretend to count the money; you will never have
done. I will dig a hole, and bury it. There is no time to be lost." "You
are in the right, husband," replied she, "but let us know, as nigh as
possible, how much we have. I will borrow a small measure, and measure
it, while you dig the hole."

Away the wife ran to her brother-in-law Cassim, who lived just by, and
addressing herself to his wife, desired her to lend her a measure for a
little while. Her sister-in-law asked her whether she would have a great
or a small one. The other asked for a small one. She bade her stay a
little, and she would readily fetch one,

The sister-in-law did so, but as she knew Ali Baba's poverty, she was
curious to know what sort of grain his wife wanted to measure, and
artfully putting some suet at the bottom of the measure, brought it to
her, with an excuse that she was sorry that she had made her stay so
long, but that she could not find it sooner.

Ali Baba's wife went home, set the measure upon the heap of gold, filled
it, and emptied it often upon the sofa, till she had done, when she was
very well satisfied to find the number of measures amounted to so many
as they did, and went to tell her husband, who had almost finished
digging the hole. While Ali Baba was burying the gold, his wife, to show
her exactness and diligence to her sister-in-law, carried the measure
back again, but without taking notice that a piece of gold had stuck to
the bottom. "Sister," said she, giving it to her again, "you see that I
have not kept your measure long. I am obliged to you for it, and return
it with thanks."

As soon as Ali Baba's wife was gone, Cassim's looked at the bottom of
the measure, and was in inexpressible surprise to find a piece of gold
sticking to it. Envy immediately possessed her breast. "What!" said she,
"has Ali Baba gold so plentiful as to measure it? Whence has he all this
wealth?"

Cassim, her husband, was at his counting-house. When he came home, his
wife said to him, "Cassim, I know you think yourself rich, but Ali Baba
is infinitely richer than you. He does not count his money, but measures
it." Cassim desired her to explain the riddle, which she did, by telling
him the stratagem she had used to make the discovery, and showed him the
piece of money, which was so old that they could not tell in what
prince's reign it was coined.

Cassim, after he had married the rich widow, had never treated Ali Baba
as a brother, but neglected him; and now, instead of being pleased, he
conceived a base envy at his brother's prosperity. He could not sleep
all that night, and went to him in the morning before sunrise. "Ali
Baba," said he, "I am surprised at you; you pretend to be miserably
poor, and yet you measure gold. My wife found this at the bottom of the
measure you borrowed yesterday."

By this discourse, Ali Baba perceived that Cassim and his wife, through
his own wife's folly, knew what they had so much reason to conceal; but
what was done, could not be undone. Therefore, without showing the least
surprise or trouble, he confessed all, and offered his brother part of
his treasure to keep the secret.

"I expect as much," replied Cassim haughtily; "but I must know exactly
where this treasure is, and how I may visit it myself when I choose;
otherwise, I will go and inform against you, and then you will not only
get no more, but will lose all you have, and I shall have a share for my
information."

Ali Baba told him all he desired, even to the very words he was to use
to gain admission into the cave.

Cassim rose the next morning long before the sun, and set out for the
forest with ten mules bearing great chests, which he designed to fill,
and followed the road which Ali Baba had pointed out to him. He was not
long before he reached the rock, and found out the place, by the tree
and other marks which his brother had given him. When he reached the
entrance of the cavern, he pronounced the words, "Open, Sesame!" The
door immediately opened, and, when he was in, closed upon him. In
examining the cave, he was in great admiration to find much more riches
than he had expected from Ali Baba's relation. He quickly laid as many
bags of gold as he could carry at the door of the cavern; but his
thoughts were so full of the great riches he should possess, that he
could not think of the necessary word to make it open, but instead of
"Sesame," said, "Open, Barley!" and was much amazed to find that the
door remained fast shut. He named several sorts of grain, but still the
door would not open.

Cassim had never expected such an incident, and was so alarmed at the
danger he was in, that the more he endeavoured to remember the word
"Sesame," the more his memory was confounded, and he had as much
forgotten it as if he had never heard it mentioned. He threw down the
bags he had loaded himself with, and walked distractedly up and down the
cave, without having the least regard to the riches that were around
him.

About noon the robbers visited their cave. At some distance they saw
Cassim's mules straggling about the rock, with great chests on their
backs. Alarmed at this, they galloped full speed to the cave. They drove
away the mules, which strayed through the forest so far, that they were
soon out of sight, and went directly, with their naked sabres in their
hands, to the door, which, on their captain pronouncing the proper
words, immediately opened.

Cassim, who heard the noise of the horses' feet, at once guessed the
arrival of the robbers, and resolved to make one effort for his life. He
rushed to the door, and no sooner saw the door open, than he ran out and
threw the leader down, but could not escape the other robbers, who with
their scimitars soon deprived him of life.

The first care of the robbers after this was to examine the cave. They
found all the bags which Cassim had brought to the door, to be ready to
load his mules, and carried them again to their places, but they did not
miss what Ali Baba had taken away before. Then holding a council, and
deliberating upon this occurrence, they guessed that Cassim, when he was
in, could no get out again, but could not imagine how he had learned the
secret words by which alone he could enter. They could not deny the fact
of his being there; and to terrify any person or accomplice who should
attempt the same thing, they agreed to cut Cassim's body into four
quarters--to hang two on one side, and two on the other, within the door
of the cave. They had no sooner taken this resolution than they put it
in execution; and when they had nothing more to detain them, left the
place of their hoards well closed. They mounted their horses, went to
beat the roads again, and to attack the caravans they might meet.

In the mean time, Cassim's wife was very uneasy when night came, and her
husband was not returned. She ran to Ali Baba in great alarm, and said,
"I believe, brother-in-law, that you know Cassim is gone to the forest,
and upon what account; it is now night, and he has not returned; I am
afraid some misfortune has happened to him." Ali Baba told her that she
need not frighten herself, for that certainly Cassim would not think it
proper to come into the town till the night should be pretty far
advanced.

Cassim's wife, considering how much it concerned her husband to keep the
business secret, was the more easily persuaded to believe her
brother-in-law. She went home again, and waited patiently till midnight.
Then her fear redoubled, and her grief was the more sensible because she
was forced to keep it to herself. She repented of her foolish curiosity,
and cursed her desire of prying into the affairs of her brother and
sister-in-law. She spent all the night in weeping; and as soon as it was
day went to them, telling them, by her tears, the cause of her coming.

Ali Baba did not wait for his sister-in-law to desire him to go to see
what was become of Cassim, but departed immediately with his three
asses, begging of her first to moderate her affliction. He went to the
forest, and when he came near the rock, having seen neither his brother
nor the mules in his way, was seriously alarmed at finding some blood
spilt near the door, which he took for an ill omen; but when he had
pronounced the word, and the door had opened, he was struck with horror
at the dismal sight of his brother's body. He was not long in
determining how he should pay the last dues to his brother; but without
adverting to the little fraternal affection he had shown for him, went
into the cave, to find something to enshroud his remains; and having
loaded one of his asses with them, covered them over with wood. The
other two asses he loaded with bags of gold, covering them with wood
also as before; and then bidding the door shut, came away; but was so
cautious as to stop some time at the end of the forest, that he might
not go into the town before night. When he came home, he drove the two
asses loaded with gold into his little yard, and left the care of
unloading them to his wife, while he led the other to his
sister-in-law's house.

Ali Baba knocked at the door, which was opened by Morgiana, a clever,
intelligent slave, who was fruitful in inventions to meet the most
difficult circumstances. When he came into the court, he unloaded the
ass, and taking Morgiana aside, said to her, "You must observe an
inviolable secrecy. Your master's body is contained in these two
panniers. We must bury him as if he had died a natural death. Go now and
tell your mistress. I leave the matter to your wit and skilful devices."

Ali Baba helped to place the body in Cassim's house, again recommended
to Morgiana to act her part well, and then returned with his ass.

Morgiana went out early the next morning to a druggist, and asked for a
sort of lozenge which was considered efficacious in the most dangerous
disorders. The apothecary inquired who was ill? She replied, with a
sigh, "Her good master Cassim himself: and that he could neither eat nor
speak." In the evening Morgiana went to the same druggist's again, and
with tears in her eyes, asked for an essence which they used to give to
sick people only when at the last extremity. "Alas!" said she, taking it
from the apothecary, "I am afraid that this remedy will have no better
effect than the lozenges; and that I shall lose my good master."

On the other hand, as Ali Baba and his wife were often seen to go
between Cassim's and their own house all that day, and to seem
melancholy, nobody was surprised in the evening to hear the lamentable
shrieks and cries of Cassim's wife and Morgiana, who gave out everywhere
that her master was dead. The next morning at daybreak Morgiana went to
an old cobbler whom she knew to be always early at his stall, and
bidding him good-morrow, put a piece of gold into his hand, saying,
"Baba Mustapha, you must bring with you your sewing tackle, and come
with me; but I must tell you, I shall blindfold you when you come to
such a place."

Baba Mustapha seemed to hesitate a little at these words. "Oh! oh!"
replied he, "you would have me do something against my conscience, or
against my honour?" "God forbid," said Morgiana, putting another piece
of gold into his hand, "that I should ask anything that is contrary to
your honour! only come along with me and fear nothing."

Baba Mustapha went with Morgiana, who, after she had bound his eyes with
a handkerchief at the place she had mentioned, conveyed him to her
deceased master's house, and never unloosed his eyes till he had entered
the room where she had put the corpse together. "Baba Mustapha," said
she, "you must make haste and sew the parts of this body together; and
when you have done, I will give you another piece of gold."

After Baba Mustapha had finished his task, she blindfolded him again,
gave him the third piece of gold as she had promised, and recommending
secrecy to him carried him back to the place where she first bound his
eyes, pulled off the bandage, and let him go home, but watched him that
he returned toward his stall, till he was quite out of sight, for fear
he should have the curiosity to return and dodge her; she then went
home. Morgiana, on her return, warmed some water to wash the body, and
at the same time Ali Baba perfumed it with incense, and wrapped it in
the burying clothes with the accustomed ceremonies. Not long after the
proper officer brought the bier, and when the attendants of the mosque,
whose business it was to wash the dead, offered to perform their duty,
she told them that it was done already. Shortly after this the imaun and
the other ministers of the mosque arrived. Four neighbours carried the
corpse to the burying-ground, following the imaun, who recited some
prayers. Ali Baba came after with some neighbours, who often relieved
the others in carrying the bier to the burying-ground. Morgiana, a slave
to the deceased, followed in the procession, weeping, beating her
breast, and tearing her hair. Cassim's wife stayed at home mourning,
uttering lamentable cries with the women of the neighbourhood, who came,
according to custom, during the funeral, and joining their lamentations
with hers filled the quarter far and near with sounds of sorrow.

In this manner Cassim's melancholy death was concealed and hushed up
between Ali Baba, his widow, and Morgiana, his slave, with so much
contrivance that nobody in the city had the least knowledge or suspicion
of the cause of it. Three or four days after the funeral, Ali Baba
removed his few goods openly to his sister-in-law's house, in which it
was agreed that he should in future live; but the money he had taken
from the robbers he conveyed thither by night. As for Cassim's
warehouse, he entrusted it entirely to the management of his eldest son.

While these things were being done, the forty robbers again visited
their retreat in the forest. Great, then, was their surprise to find
Cassim's body taken away, with some of their bags of gold. "We are
certainly discovered," said the captain. "The removal of the body, and
the loss of some of our money, plainly shows that the man whom we killed
had an accomplice: and for our own lives' sake we must try and find him.
What say you, my lads?"

All the robbers unanimously approved of the captain's proposal.

"Well," said the captain, "one of you, the boldest and most skilful
among you, must go into the town, disguised as a traveller and a
stranger, to try if he can hear any talk of the man whom we have killed,
and endeavour to find out who he was, and where he lived. This is a
matter of the first importance, and for fear of any treachery, I propose
that whoever undertakes this business without success, even though the
failure arises only from an error of judgment, shall suffer death."

Without waiting for the sentiments of his companions, one of the robbers
started up, and said, "I submit to this condition, and think it an
honour to expose my life to serve the troop."

After this robber had received great commendations from the captain and
his comrades, he disguised himself so that nobody would take him for
what he was; and taking his leave of the troop that night, went into the
town just at daybreak; and walked up and down, till accidentally he came
to Baba Mustapha's stall, which was always open before any of the shops.

Baba Mustapha was seated with an awl in his hand, just going to work.
The robber saluted him, bidding him good-morrow; and perceiving that he
was old, said, "Honest man, you begin to work very early: is it possible
that one of your age can see so well? I question, even if it were
somewhat lighter, whether you could see to stitch."

"You do not know me," replied Baba Mustapha; "for old as I am, I have
extraordinary good eyes; and you will not doubt it when I tell you that
I sewed the body of a dead man together in a place where I had not so
much light as I have now."

"A dead body!" exclaimed the robber, with affected amazement. "Yes,
yes," answered Baba Mustapha, "I see you want to have me speak out, but
you shall know no more."

The robber felt sure that he had discovered what he sought. He pulled
out a piece of gold, and putting it into Baba Mustapha's hand, said to
him, "I do not want to learn your secret, though I can assure you you
might safely trust me with it. The only thing I desire of you is to show
me the house where you stitched up the dead body."

"If I were disposed to do you that favour," replied Baba Mustapha, "I
assure you I cannot. I was taken to a certain place, whence I was led
blindfold to the house, and afterward brought back again in the same
manner; you see, therefore, the impossibility of my doing what you
desire."

"Well," replied the robber, "you may, however, remember a little of the
way that you were led blindfold. Come, let me blind your eyes at the
same place. We will walk together; perhaps you may recognise some part;
and as everybody ought to be paid for their trouble, there is another
piece of gold for you; gratify me in what I ask you." So saying, he put
another piece of gold into his hand.

The two pieces of gold were great temptations to Baba Mustapha. He
looked at them a long time in his hand, without saying a word, but at
last he pulled out his purse and put them in. "I cannot promise," said
he to the robber, "that I can remember the way exactly; but since you
desire, I will try what I can do." At these words Baba Mustapha rose up,
to the great joy of the robber, and led him to the place where Morgiana
had bound his eyes. "It was here," said Baba Mustapha, "I was
blindfolded; and I turned this way." The robber tied his handkerchief
over his eyes, and walked by him till he stopped directly at Cassim's
house, where Ali Baba then lived. The thief, before he pulled off the
band, marked the door with a piece of chalk, which he had ready in his
hand, and then asked him if he knew whose house that was; to which Baba
Mustapha replied that as he did not live in that neighbourhood, he could
not tell.

The robber, finding he could discover no more from Baba Mustapha,
thanked him for the trouble he had taken, and left him to go back to his
stall, while he returned to the forest, persuaded that he should be very
well received.

A little after the robber and Baba Mustapha had parted, Morgiana went
out of Ali Baba's house upon some errand, and upon her return, seeing
the mark the robber had made, stopped to observe it. "What can be the
meaning of this mark?" said she to herself; "somebody intends my master
no good: however, with whatever intention it was done, it is advisable
to guard against the worst." Accordingly, she fetched a piece of chalk,
and marked two or three doors on each side, in the same manner, without
saying a word to her master or mistress.

In the mean time, the robber rejoined his troop in the forest, and
recounted to them his success; expatiating upon his good fortune, in
meeting so soon with the only person who could inform him of what he
wanted to know. All the robbers listened to him with the utmost
satisfaction; when the captain, after commending his diligence,
addressing himself to them all, said, "Comrades, we have no time to
lose: let us set off well armed, without its appearing who we are; but
that we may not excite any suspicion, let only one or two go into the
town together, and join at our rendezvous, which shall be the great
square. In the mean time, our comrade who brought us the good news and I
will go and find out the house, that we may consult what had best be
done."

This speech and plan was approved of by all, and they were soon ready.
They filed off in parties of two each, after some interval of time, and
got into the town without being in the least suspected. The captain, and
he who had visited the town in the morning as spy, came in the last. He
led the captain into the street where he had marked Ali Baba's
residence; and when they came to the first of the houses which Morgiana
had marked, he pointed it out. But the captain observed that the next
door was chalked in the same manner and in the same place; and showing
it to his guide, asked him which house it was, that, or the first. The
guide was so confounded, that he knew not what answer to make; but still
more puzzled, when he and the captain saw five or six houses similarly
marked. He assured the captain, with an oath, that he had marked but
one, and could not tell who had chalked the rest, so that he could not
distinguish the house which the cobbler had stopped at.

The captain, finding that their design had proved abortive, went
directly to the place of meeting, and told his troop that they had lost
their labour, and must return to their cave. He himself set them the
example, and they all returned as they had come.

When the troop was all got together, the captain told them the reason of
their returning; and presently the conductor was declared by all worthy
of death. He condemned himself, acknowledging that he ought to have
taken better precaution, and prepared to receive the stroke from him who
was appointed to cut off his head.

But as the safety of the troop required the discovery of the second
intruder into the cave, another of the gang, who promised himself that
he should succeed better, presented himself, and his offer being
accepted, he went and corrupted Baba Mustapha, as the other had done;
and being shown the house, marked it in a place more remote from sight,
with red chalk.

Not long after, Morgiana, whose eyes nothing could escape, went out, and
seeing the red chalk, and arguing with herself as she had done before,
marked the other neighbours' houses in the same place and manner.

The robber, at his return to his company, valued himself much on the
precaution he had taken, which he looked upon as an infallible way of
distinguishing Ali Baba's house from the others; and the captain and all
of them thought it must succeed. They conveyed themselves into the town
with the same precaution as before; but when the robber and his captain
came to the street, they found the same difficulty; at which the captain
was enraged, and the robber in as great confusion as his predecessor.

Thus the captain and his troop were forced to retire a second time, and
much more dissatisfied; while the robber who had been the author of the
mistake underwent the same punishment, to which he willingly submitted.

The captain, having lost two brave fellows of his troop, was afraid of
diminishing it too much by pursuing this plan to get information of the
residence of their plunderer. He found by their example that their heads
were not so good as their hands on such occasions; and therefore
resolved to take upon himself the important commission.

Accordingly, he went and addressed himself to Baba Mustapha, who did him
the same service he had done to the other robbers. He did not set any
particular mark on the house, but examined and observed it so carefully,
by passing often by it, that it was impossible for him to mistake it.

The captain, well satisfied with his attempt, and informed of what he
wanted to know, returned to the forest; and when he came into the cave,
where the troop waited for him, said, "Now, comrades, nothing can
prevent our full revenge, as I am certain of the house; and in my way
hither I have thought how to put it into execution, but if any one can
form a better expedient, let him communicate it." He then told them his
contrivance; and as they approved of it, ordered them to go into the
villages about, and buy nineteen mules, with thirty-eight large leather
jars, one full of oil, and the others empty.

In two or three days' time the robbers had purchased the mules and jars,
and as the mouths of the jars were rather too narrow for his purpose,
the captain caused them to be widened, and after having put one of his
men into each, with the weapons which he thought fit, leaving open the
seam which had been undone to leave them room to breathe, he rubbed the
jars on the outside with oil from the full vessel.

Things being thus prepared, when the nineteen mules were loaded with
thirty-seven robbers in jars, and the jar of oil, the captain, as their
driver, set out with them, and reached the town by the dusk of the
evening, as he had intended. He led them through the streets, till he
came to Ali Baba's, at whose door he designed to have knocked; but was
prevented by his sitting there after supper to take a little fresh air.
He stopped his mules, addressed himself to him, and said, "I have
brought some oil a great way, to sell at tomorrow's market; and it is
now so late that I do not know where to lodge. If I should not be
troublesome to you, do me the favour to let me pass the night with you,
and I shall be very much obliged by your hospitality."

Though Ali Baba had seen the captain of the robbers in the forest, and
had heard him speak, it was impossible to know him in the disguise of an
oil merchant. He told him he should be welcome, and immediately opened
his gates for the mules to go into the yard. At the same time he called
to a slave, and ordered him, when the mules were unloaded, to put them
into the stable, and to feed them; and then went to Morgiana, to bid her
get a good supper for his guest. After they had finished supper, Ali
Baba, charging Morgiana afresh to take care of his guest, said to her,
"To-morrow morning I design to go to the bath before day; take care my
bathing linen be ready, give them to Abdalla (which was the slave's
name), and make me some good broth against my return." After this he
went to bed.

In the mean time the captain of the robbers went into the yard, and took
off the lid of each jar, and gave his people orders what to do.
Beginning at the first jar, and so on to the last, he said to each man:
"As soon as I throw some stones out of the chamber window where I lie,
do not fail to come out, and I will immediately join you." After this he
returned into the house, when Morgiana, taking up a light, conducted him
to his chamber, where she left him; and he, to avoid any suspicion, put
the light out soon after, and laid himself down in his clothes, that he
might be the more ready to rise.

Morgiana, remembering Ali Baba's orders, got his bathing linen ready,
and ordered Abdalla to set on the pot for the broth; but while she was
preparing it the lamp went out, and there was no more oil in the house,
nor any candles. What to do she did not know, for the broth must be
made. Abdalla, seeing her very uneasy, said, "Do not fret and tease
yourself, but go into the yard, and take some oil out of one of the
jars."

Morgiana thanked Abdalla for his advice, took the oil-pot, and went into
the yard; when, as she came nigh the first jar, the robber within said
softly, "Is it time?"

Though naturally much surprised at finding a man in the jar instead of
the oil she wanted, she immediately felt the importance of keeping
silence, as Ali Baba, his family, and herself were in great danger; and
collecting herself, without showing the least emotion, she answered,
"Not yet, but presently." She went quietly in this manner to all the
jars, giving the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil.

By this means Morgiana found that her master Ali Baba had admitted
thirty-eight robbers into his house, and that this pretended oil
merchant was their captain. She made what haste she could to fill her
oil-pot, and returned into her kitchen, where, as soon as she had
lighted her lamp, she took a great kettle, went again to the oil-jar,
filled the kettle, set it on a large wood fire, and as soon as it boiled
went and poured enough into every jar to stifle and destroy the robber
within.

When this action, worthy of the courage of Morgiana, was executed
without any noise, as she had projected, she returned into the kitchen
with the empty kettle; and having put out the great fire she had made to
boil the oil, and leaving just enough to make the broth, put out the
lamp also, and remained silent, resolving not to go to rest till she had
observed what might follow through a window of the kitchen, which opened
into the yard.

She had not waited long before the captain of the robbers got up, opened
the window, and finding no light, and hearing no noise, or any one
stirring in the house, gave the appointed signal, by throwing little
stones, several of which hit the jars, as he doubted not by the sound
they gave. He then listened, but not hearing or perceiving anything
whereby he could judge that his companions stirred, he began to grow
very uneasy, threw stones again a second and also a third time, and
could not comprehend the reason that none of them should answer his
signal. Much alarmed, he went softly down into the yard, and going to
the first jar, while asking the robber, whom he thought alive, if he was
in readiness, smelt the hot boiled oil, which sent forth a steam out of
the jar. Hence he suspected that his plot to murder Ali Baba, and
plunder his house, was discovered. Examining all the jars, one after
another, he found that all his gang were dead; and, enraged to despair
at having failed in his design, he forced the lock of a door that led
from the yard to the garden, and climbing over the walls made his
escape.

When Morgiana saw him depart, she went to bed, satisfied and pleased to
have succeeded so well in saving her master and family.

Ali Baba rose before day, and, followed by his slave, went to the baths,
entirely ignorant of the important event which had happened at home.

When he returned from the baths, he was very much surprised to see the
oil-jars, and that the merchant was not gone with the mules. He asked
Morgiana, who opened the door, the reason of it. "My good master,"
answered she, "God preserve you and all your family. You will be better
informed of what you wish to know when you have seen what I have to show
you, if you will follow me."

As soon as Morgiana had shut the door, Ali Baba followed her, when she
requested him to look into the first jar, and see if there was any oil.
Ali Baba did so, and seeing a man, started back in alarm, and cried out.
"Do not be afraid," said Morgiana "the man you see there can neither do
you nor anybody else any harm. He is dead." "Ah, Morgiana," said Ali
Baba, "what is it you show me? Explain yourself." "I will," replied
Morgiana. "Moderate your astonishment, and do not excite the curiosity
of your neighbours; for it is of great importance to keep this affair
secret. Look into all the other jars."

Ali Baba examined all the other jars, one after another; and when he
came to that which had the oil in it, found it prodigiously sunk, and
stood for some time motionless, sometimes looking at the jars, and
sometimes at Morgiana, without saying a word, so great was his surprise.
At last, when he had recovered himself, he said, "And what is become of
the merchant?"

"Merchant!" answered she; "he is as much one as I am. I will tell you
who he is, and what is become of him; but you had better hear the story
in your own chamber; for it is time for your health that you had your
broth after your bathing."

Morgiana then told him all she had done, from the first observing the
mark upon the house, to the destruction of the robbers, and the flight
of their captain.

On hearing of these brave deeds from the lips of Morgiana, Ali Baba said
to her--"God, by your means, has delivered me from the snares these
robbers laid for my destruction. I owe, therefore, my life to you; and,
for the first token of my acknowledgment, give you your liberty from
this moment, till I can complete your recompense as I intend."

Ali Baba's garden was very long, and shaded at the further end by a
great number of large trees. Near these he and the slave Abdalla dug a
trench, long and wide enough to hold the bodies of the robbers; and as
the earth was light, they were not long in doing it. When this was done,
Ali Baba hid the jars and weapons; and as he had no occasion for the
mules, he sent them at different times to be sold in the market by his
slave.

While Ali Baba took these measures, the captain of the forty robbers
returned to the forest with inconceivable mortification. He did not stay
long; the loneliness of the gloomy cavern became frightful to him. He
determined, however, to avenge the fate of his companions, and to
accomplish the death of Ali Baba. For this purpose he returned to the
town, and took a lodging in a khan, and disguised himself as a merchant
in silks. Under this assumed character, he gradually conveyed a great
many sorts of rich stuffs and fine linen to his lodging from the cavern,
but with all the necessary precautions to conceal the place whence he
brought them. In order to dispose of the merchandise, when he had thus
amassed them together, he took a warehouse, which happened to be
opposite to Cassim's, which Ali Baba's son had occupied since the death
of his uncle.

He took the name of Cogia Houssain, and, as a new-comer, was, according
to custom, extremely civil and complaisant to all the merchants his
neighbours. Ali Baba's son was, from his vicinity, one of the first to
converse with Cogia Houssain, who strove to cultivate his friendship
more particularly. Two or three days after he was settled, Ali Baba came
to see his son, and the captain of the robbers recognised him at once,
and soon learned from his son who he was. After this he increased his
assiduities, caressed him in the most engaging manner, made him some
small presents, and often asked him to dine and sup with him, when he
treated him very handsomely.

Ali Baba's son did not choose to lie under such obligation to Cogia
Houssain; but was so much straitened for want of room in his house, that
he could not entertain him. He therefore acquainted his father, Ali
Baba, with his wish to invite him in return.

Ali Baba with great pleasure took the treat upon himself. "Son," said
he, "to-morrow being Friday, which is a day that the shops of such great
merchants as Cogia Houssain and yourself are shut, get him to accompany
you, and as you pass by my door, call in. I will go and order Morgiana
to provide a supper."

The next day Ali Baba's son and Cogia Houssain met by appointment, took
their walk, and as they returned, Ali Baba's son led Cogia Houssain
through the street where his father lived, and when they came to the
house, stopped and knocked at the door. "This, sir," said he, "is my
father's house, who, from the account I have given him of your
friendship, charged me to procure him the honour of your acquaintance;
and I desire you to add this pleasure to those for which I am already
indebted to you."

Though it was the sole aim of Cogia Houssain to introduce himself into
Ali Baba's house, that he might kill him, without hazarding his own life
or making any noise, yet he excused himself, and offered to take his
leave; but a slave having opened the door, Ali Baba's son took him
obligingly by the hand, and, in a manner, forced him in.

Ali Baba received Cogia Houssain with a smiling countenance, and in the
most obliging manner he could wish. He thanked him for all the favours
he had done his son; adding withal, the obligation was the greater, as
he was a young man, not much acquainted with the world, and that he
might contribute to his information.

Cogia Houssain returned the compliment by assuring Ali Baba that though
his son might not have acquired the experience of older men, he had good
sense equal to the experience of many others. After a little more
conversation on different subjects, he offered again to take his leave,
when Ali Baba, stopping him, said, "Where are you going, sir, in so much
haste? I beg you would do me the honour to sup with me, though my
entertainment may not be worthy your acceptance; such as it is, I
heartily offer it." "Sir," replied Cogia Houssain, "I am thoroughly
persuaded of your good-will; but the truth is, I can eat no victuals
that have any salt in them; therefore judge how I should feel at your
table." "If that is the only reason," said Ali Baba, "it ought not to
deprive me of the honour of your company; for, in the first place, there
is no salt ever put into my bread, and as to the meat we shall have
to-night, I promise you there shall be none in that. Therefore you must
do me the favour to stay. I will return immediately."

Ali Baba went into the kitchen, and ordered Morgiana to put no salt to
the meat that was to be dressed that night; and to make quickly two or
three ragouts besides what he had ordered, but be sure to put no salt in
them.

Morgiana, who was always ready to obey her master, could not help being
surprised at his strange order. "Who is this strange man," said she,
"who eats no salt with his meat? Your supper will be spoiled, if I keep
it back so long." "Do not be angry, Morgiana," replied Ali Baba; "he is
an honest man, therefore do as I bid you."

Morgiana obeyed, though with no little reluctance, and had a curiosity
to see this man who ate no salt. To this end, when she had finished what
she had to do in the kitchen, she helped Abdalla to carry up the dishes;
and looking at Cogia Houssain, knew him at first sight, notwithstanding
his disguise, to be the captain of the robbers, and examining him very
carefully, perceived that he had a dagger under his garment. "I am not
in the least amazed," said she to herself, "that this wicked man, who is
my master's greatest enemy, would eat no salt with him, since he intends
to assassinate him; but I will prevent him."

Morgiana, while they were at supper, determined in her own mind to
execute one of the boldest acts ever meditated. When Abdalla came for
the dessert of fruit, and had put it with the wine and glasses before
Ali Baba, Morgiana retired, dressed herself neatly, with a suitable
head-dress like a dancer, girded her waist with a silver-gilt girdle, to
which there hung a poniard with a hilt and guard of the same metal, and
put a handsome mask on her face. When she had thus disguised herself,
she said to Abdalla, "Take your tabour, and let us go and divert our
master and his son's friend, as we do sometimes when he is alone."

Abdalla took his tabour and played all the way into the hall before
Morgiana, who, when she came to the door, made a low obeisance by way of
asking leave to exhibit her skill, while Abdalla left off playing. "Come
in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba, "and let Cogia Houssain see what you can
do, that he may tell us what he thinks of your performance."

Cogia Houssain, who did not expect this diversion after supper, began to
fear he should not be able to take advantage of the opportunity he
thought he had found; but hoped, if he now missed his aim, to secure it
another time, by keeping up a friendly correspondence with the father
and son; therefore, though he could have wished Ali Baba would have
declined the dance, he pretended to be obliged to him for it, and had
the complaisance to express his satisfaction at what he said, which
pleased his host.

As soon as Abdalla saw that Ali Baba and Cogia Houssain had done
talking, he began to play on the tabour, and accompanied it with an air,
to which Morgiana, who was an excellent performer, danced in such a
manner as would have created admiration in any company.

After she had danced several dances with much grace, she drew the
poniard, and holding it in her hand, began a dance, in which she outdid
herself by the many different figures, light movements, and the
surprising leaps and wonderful exertions with which she accompanied it.
Sometimes she presented the poniard to one breast, sometimes to another,
and oftentimes seemed to strike her own. At last, she snatched the
tabour from Abdalla with her left hand, and holding the dagger in her
right presented the other side of the tabour, after the manner of those
who get a livelihood by dancing, and solicit the liberality of the
spectators.

Ali Baba put a piece of gold into the tabour, as did also his son; and
Cogia Houssain seeing that she was coming to him, had pulled his purse
out of his bosom to make her a present; but while he was putting his
hand into it, Morgiana, with a courage and resolution worthy of herself,
plunged the poniard into his heart.

Ali Baba and his son, shocked at this action, cried out aloud. "Unhappy
woman!" exclaimed Ali Baba, "what have you done to ruin me and my
family?" "It was to preserve, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana; "for
see here," continued she, opening the pretended Cogia Houssain's
garment, and showing the dagger, "what an enemy you had entertained?
Look well at him, and you will find him to be both the fictitious oil
merchant, and the captain of the gang of forty robbers. Remember, too,
that he would eat no salt with you; and what would you have more to
persuade you of his wicked design? Before I saw him, I suspected him as
soon as you told me you had such a guest. I knew him, and you now find
that my suspicion was not groundless."

Ali Baba, who immediately felt the new obligation he had to Morgiana for
saving his life a second time, embraced her: "Morgiana," said he, "I
gave you your liberty, and then promised you that my gratitude should
not stop there, but that I would soon give you higher proofs of its
sincerity, which I now do by making you my daughter-in-law." Then
addressing himself to his son, he said, "I believe you, son, to be so
dutiful a child, that you will not refuse Morgiana for your wife. You
see that Cogia Houssain sought your friendship with a treacherous design
to take away my life; and if he had succeeded, there is no doubt but he
would have sacrificed you also to his revenge. Consider, that by
marrying Morgiana you marry the preserver of my family and your own,"

The son, far from showing any dislike, readily consented to the
marriage; not only because he would not disobey his father, but also
because it was agreeable to his inclination. After this they thought of
burying the captain of the robbers with his comrades, and did it so
privately that nobody discovered their bones till many years after, when
no one had any concern in the publication of this remarkable history. A
few days afterward, Ali Baba celebrated the nuptials of his son and
Morgiana with great solemnity, a sumptuous feast, and the usual dancing
and spectacles; and had the satisfaction to see that his friends and
neighbours, whom he invited, had no knowledge of the true motives of the
marriage; but that those who were not unacquainted with Morgiana's good
qualities commended his generosity and goodness of heart Ali Baba did
not visit the robbers' cave for a whole year, as he supposed the other
two, whom he could get no account of, might be alive.

At the year's end, when he found they had not made any attempt to
disturb him, he had the curiosity to make another journey. He mounted
his horse, and when he came to the cave he alighted, tied his horse to a
tree, then approaching the entrance, and pronouncing the words, "Open,
Sesame!" the door opened. He entered the cavern, and by the condition he
found things in, judged that nobody had been there since the captain had
fetched the goods for his shop. From this time he believed he was the
only person in the world who had the secret of opening the cave, and
that all the treasure was at his sole disposal. He put as much gold into
his saddle-bag as his horse would carry, and returned to town. Some
years later he carried his son to the cave and taught him the secret,
which he handed down to his posterity, who, using their good fortune
with moderation, lived in great honour and splendour.


