Once upon a time there lived an old Queen, whose husband had been dead
some years, and left her with one child, a beautiful daughter. When this
daughter grew up she was to be married to a King's son, who lived far
away.

Now when the time came for her to leave, the mother gave her daughter a
lock of hair, saying, "Dear child, preserve this well, and it will help
you out of trouble."

Afterwards the mother and daughter took a sorrowful leave of each other,
and the princess placed the lock of hair in her bosom, mounted her horse
Falada, and rode away to her intended bridegroom. Now this horse could
speak. After she had ridden for about an hour she became very thirsty,
and said to her servant, "Dismount, and bring me some water from yonder
stream in the cup which you carry with you, for I am very thirsty."

"If you are thirsty," replied the servant, "dismount yourself, and stoop
down to drink the water, for I will not be your maid!"

The Princess, on account of her great thirst, did as she was bid, and
bending over the brook she drank of its water without daring to use her
golden cup. While she did so the lock of hair said, "Ah! if thy mother
knew this, her heart would break."

As she leaned over the water, the lock of hair fell out of her bosom and
floated down the stream without her noticing it, because of her great
anguish. But her servant had seen what happened, and she was glad, for
now she had power over her mistress, because with the loss of the lock
of hair, she became weak and helpless. When, then, the Princess was
going to mount her horse again, the maid said, "No, Falada belongs to
me; you must get upon this horse:" and she was forced to yield. Then
the servant bade her take off her royal clothes, and put on her common
ones instead; and, lastly, she made the Princess promise and swear by
the open sky that she would say nought of what had passed at the King's
palace; for if she had not sworn she would have been murdered. But
Falada, the horse, observed all that passed with great attention.

Then the servant mounted upon Falada, and the rightful Princess upon
a sorry hack; and in that way they traveled on till they came to the
King's palace. On their arrival there were great rejoicings, and the
young Prince, running towards them, lifted the servant off her horse,
supposing that she was the true bride; and she was led up the steps in
state, while the real Princess had to stop below. Just then the old King
chanced to look out of his window and saw her standing in the court,
and he remarked how delicate and beautiful she was; and, going to the
royal apartments, he inquired there of the bride who it was she had
brought with her and left below in the courtyard.

"Only a girl whom I brought with me for company," said the bride. "Give
the wench some work to do, that she may not grow idle."

The old King, however, had no work for her, and knew of nothing; until
at last he said, "Ah! there is a boy who keeps the geese: she can help
him." This youth was called Conrad, and the true bride was set to keep
geese with him.

Soon after this, the false bride said to her betrothed, "Dearest, will
you grant me a favor?"

"Yes," said he; "with the greatest pleasure."

"Then let the butcher be summoned, that he may cut off the head of the
horse on which I rode hither, for it has angered me on the way." In
reality she feared lest the horse might tell how she had used the
rightful Princess, and she was glad when it was decided that Falada
should die.

This came to the ears of the Princess, and she promised secretly to the
butcher to give him a piece of gold if he would show her a kindness,
which was, that he would nail the head of Falada over a certain large
and gloomy arch, through which she had to pass daily with the geese, so
that then she might still see her old steed as she had been accustomed.
The butcher promised, and, after killing the horse, nailed the head in
the place which the Princess pointed out, over the door of the arch.

Early in the morning, when she and Conrad drove the geese through the
arch, she said in passing:

 "Ah, Falada, that you
 hang so high!"

and the head replied:

 "Ah Princess, that you go humbly by!
 Thy mother's heart would surely break
 Were she to know of your heart-ache!"

Then she drove on through the town to a field. When they arrived in the
meadow, she sat down and unloosened her hair, which was of pure gold.
Its shining appearance so charmed Conrad that he tried to pull out a
couple of locks. So she sang:

 "Blow, blow, thou wind,
 Blow Conrad's hat away."

Immediately there came a strong wind, which snatched Conrad's hat off
his head, and led him a rare chase; and when he returned what with
combing and curling, the Princess had rearranged her hair, so that he
could not catch a loose lock. This made Conrad very angry, and he would
not speak to her; so all day long they tended their geese in silence.

After they returned home Conrad went to the old King and declared he
would no longer keep geese with the servant.

"Why not?" asked the old King.

"Oh! she vexes me the whole day long," said Conrad; and then the King
bade him tell all that had happened. So Conrad did, and told how, in
the morning, when they passed through a certain archway, she spoke to
a horse's head, which was nailed up over the door, and said:

 "Ah, Falada, that you hang so high!"

and it replied:

 "Ah, Princess, that you go humbly by!
 Thy mother's heart would surely break
 Were she to know of your heart-ache!"

And, further, he told how when they arrived in the meadow, she caused
the wind to blow his hat off, so that he had to run after it ever so
far. When he had finished his tale, the old King ordered him to drive
the geese out again the next morning; and he himself, when morning came,
stationed himself behind the gloomy archway, and heard the servant talk
to the head of Falada. Then he followed them also into the fields. There
he saw with his own eyes the Goose Girl and boy drive in the geese; and
after a while she sat down and, unloosening her hair, which shone like
gold, began to sing the old rhyme:

 "Blow, blow, thou wind,
 Blow Conrad's hat away."

Then the King felt a breeze come, which took off Conrad's hat, so that
he had to run a long way after it; while the Goose Girl combed out her
hair and put it back in proper trim before his return. All this the King
observed, and then went home unnoticed; and when the Goose Girl returned
at evening, he called her aside, and asked her what it all meant.

"That I dare not tell you, nor any other man," replied she; "for I have
sworn by the free sky not to speak of my griefs, else lose my life."

The King pressed her to say what it was, and left her no peace about it;
but still she refused. So at last he said, "If you will not tell me,
tell your griefs to this fireplace;" and he went away.

Then she crept into the fireplace and began to weep and groan; and soon
she relieved her heart by telling her tale. "Here sit I," she said
"forsaken by all the world, and yet I am a King's daughter; and a false
servant has exercised some charm over me, whereby I was compelled to lay
aside my royal clothes; and she has also taken my place at the
bridegroom's side, and I am forced to perform the common duties of a
Goose Girl. Oh, if my mother knew this, her heart would break with
grief!"

The old King, meanwhile, stood outside by the chimney and listened to
what she said; and when she had finished he came in, and called her away
from the fireplace. Then her royal clothes were put on, and the old
King, calling his son, showed him that he had taken a false bride, who
was only a servant-girl, and that the true bride stood there as a Goose
Girl.

The prince was glad indeed at heart when he saw her beauty and virtue.
Then there was a great feast, at which the bridegroom sat, with the
Princess on one side and the servant-girl on the other. But the latter
was dazzled, and recognized her mistress no longer in her shining dress.

When they had finished their feasting, and were beginning to be gay, the
old King set a riddle to the real servant-girl: What such an one were
worthy of who had, in such and such a manner, deceived her masters; and
he related all that had happened to the true bride. The servant-girl
replied, "Such an one deserves nothing better than to be put into a
cask, lined with sharp nails, and then to be dragged by two horses
through the streets till the wretch be killed."

"You are the woman then!" exclaimed the King; "You have proclaimed your
own punishment, and it shall be strictly fulfilled."

The sentence was at once carried out, and afterwards the Prince married
his rightful bride, and they lived long in peace and happiness.ï»¿Waupee, or the White Hawk, lived in a remote part of the forest, where
animals abounded. Every day he returned from the chase with a large
spoil, for he was one of the most skillful and lucky hunters of his
tribe. His form was like the cedar; the fire of youth beamed from his
eye; there was no forest too gloomy for him to penetrate, and no track
made by bird or beast of any kind which he could not readily follow.

One day he had gone beyond any point which he had ever before visited.
He traveled through an open wood, which enabled him to see a great
distance. At length he beheld a light breaking through the foliage of
the distant trees, which made him sure that he was on the borders of a
prairie. It was a wide plain, covered with long blue grass, and enameled
with flowers of a thousand lovely tints.

After walking for some time without a path, musing upon the open
country, and enjoying the fragrant breeze, he suddenly came to a ring
worn among the grass and the flowers, as if it had been made by
footsteps moving lightly round and round. But it was strange--so strange
as to cause the White Hawk to pause and gaze long and fixedly upon the
ground--there was no path which led to this flowery circle. There was
not even a crushed leaf nor a broken twig, nor the least trace of a
footstep, approaching or retiring, to be found. He thought he would hide
himself and lie in wait to discover, if he could, what this strange
circle meant.

Presently he heard the faint sounds of music in the air. He looked up in
the direction they came from, and as the magic notes died away he saw a
small object, like a little summer cloud that approaches the earth,
floating down from above. At first it was very small, and seemed as if
it could have been blown away by the first breeze that came along; but
it rapidly grew as he gazed upon it, and the music every moment came
clearer and more sweetly to his ear. As it neared the earth it appeared
as a basket, and it was filled with twelve sisters, of the most lovely
forms and enchanting beauty.

As soon as the basket touched the ground they leaped out, and began
straightway to dance, in the most joyous manner, around the magic ring,
striking, as they did so, a shining ball, which uttered the most
ravishing melodies, and kept time as they danced.

The White Hawk, from his concealment, entranced, gazed upon their
graceful forms and movements. He admired them all, but he was most
pleased with the youngest. He longed to be at her side, to embrace her,
to call her his own; and unable to remain longer a silent admirer, he
rushed out and endeavored to seize this twelfth beauty who so enchanted
him. But the sisters, with the quickness of birds, the moment they
descried the form of a man, leaped back into the basket, and were drawn
up into the sky.

Lamenting his ill-luck, Waupee gazed longingly upon the fairy basket as
it ascended and bore the lovely sisters from his view. "They are gone,"
he said, "and I shall see them no more."

He returned to his solitary lodge, but he found no relief to his mind.
He walked abroad, but to look at the sky, which had withdrawn from his
sight the only being he had ever loved, was painful to him now.

The next day, selecting the same hour, the White Hawk went back to the
prairie, and took his station near the ring; in order to deceive the
sisters, he assumed the form of an opossum, and sat among the grass as
if he were there engaged in chewing the cud. He had not waited long when
he saw the cloudy basket descend, and heard the same sweet music
falling as before. He crept slowly toward the ring; but the instant the
sisters caught sight of him they were startled, and sprang into their
car. It rose a short distance when one of the elder sisters spoke:

"Perhaps," she said, "it is come to show us how the game is played by
mortals."

"Oh no," the youngest replied; "quick, let us ascend."

And all joining in a chant, they rose out of sight.

Waupee, casting off his disguise, walked sorrowfully back to his
lodge--but ah, the night seemed very long to lonely White Hawk! His
whole soul was filled with the thought of the beautiful sister.

Betimes, the next day, he returned to the haunted spot, hoping and
fearing, and sighing as though his very soul would leave his body in its
anguish. He reflected upon the plan he should follow to secure success.
He had already failed twice; to fail a third time would be fatal. Near
by he found an old stump, much covered with moss, and just then in use
as the residence of a number of mice, who had stopped there on a
pilgrimage to some relatives on the other side of the prairie. The White
Hawk was so pleased with their tidy little forms that he thought he,
too, would be a mouse, especially as they were by no means formidable
to look at, and would not be at all likely to create alarm.

He accordingly, having first brought the stump and set it near the ring,
without further notice became a mouse, and peeped and sported about, and
kept his sharp little eyes busy with the others; but he did not forget
to keep one eye up toward the sky, and one ear wide open in the same
direction.

It was not long before the sisters, at their customary hour, came down
and resumed their sport.

"But see," cried the younger sister, "that stump was not there before."

She ran off, frightened, toward the basket. Her sisters only smiled, and
gathering round the old tree-stump, they struck it, in jest, when out
ran the mice, and among them Waupee. They killed them all but one, which
was pursued by the younger sister. Just as she had raised a silver stick
which she held in her hand to put an end to it, too, the form of the
White Hawk arose, and he clasped his prize in his arms. The other eleven
sprang to their basket, and were drawn up to the skies.

Waupee exerted all his skill to please his bride and win her affections.
He wiped the tears from her eyes; he related his adventures in the
chase; he dwelt upon the charms of life on the earth. He was constant in
his attentions, keeping fondly by her side, and picking out the way for
her to walk as he led her gently toward his lodge. He felt his heart
glow with joy as he entered it, and from that moment he was one of the
happiest of men.

Winter and summer passed rapidly away, and as the spring drew near with
its balmy gales and its many-colored flowers, their happiness was
increased by the presence of a beautiful boy in their lodge. What more
of earthly blessing was there for them to enjoy?

Waupee's wife was a daughter of one of the stars; and as the scenes of
earth began to pall upon her sight, she sighed to revisit her father.
But she was obliged to hide these feelings from her husband. She
remembered the charm that would carry her up, and while White Hawk was
engaged in the chase, she took occasion to construct a wicker basket,
which she kept concealed. In the mean time, she collected such rarities
from the earth as she thought would please her father, as well as the
most dainty kinds of food.

One day when Waupee was absent, and all was in readiness, she went out
to the charmed ring, taking with her her little son. As they entered the
car she commenced her magical song, and the basket rose. The song was
sad, and of a lowly and mournful cadence, and as it was wafted far away
by the wind, it caught her husband's ear. It was a voice which he well
knew, and he instantly ran to the prairie Though he made breathless
speed, he could not reach the ring before his wife and child had
ascended beyond his reach. He lifted up his voice in loud appeals, but
they were unavailing. The basket still went up. He watched it till it
became a small speck, and finally it vanished in the sky. He then bent
his head down to the ground, and was miserable.

Through a long winter and a long summer Waupee bewailed his loss, but he
found no relief. The beautiful spirit had come and gone, and he should
see it no more!

He mourned his wife's loss sorely, but his son's still more; for the boy
had both the mother's beauty and the father's strength.

In the mean time his wife had reached her home in the stars, and in the
blissful employments of her father's house she had almost forgotten that
she had left a husband upon the earth. But her son, as he grew up,
resembled more and more his father, and every day he was restless and
anxious to visit the scene of his birth. His grandfather said to his
daughter, one day:

"Go, my child, and take your son down to his father, and ask him to come
up and live with us. But tell him to bring along a specimen of each kind
of bird and animal he kills in the chase."

She accordingly took the boy and descended. The White Hawk, who was
ever near the enchanted spot, heard her voice as she came down the sky.
His heart beat with impatience as he saw her form and that of his son,
and they were soon clasped in his arms.

He heard the message of the Star, and he began to hunt with the greatest
activity, that he might collect the present with all dispatch. He spent
whole nights, as well as days, in searching for every curious and
beautiful animal and bird. He only preserved a foot, a wing, or a tail
of each.

When all was ready, Waupee visited once more each favorite spot--the
hill-top whence he had been used to see the rising sun; the stream where
he had sported as a boy; the old lodge, now looking sad and solemn,
which he was to sit in no more; and last of all, coming to the magic
circle, he gazed widely around him with tearful eyes, and, taking his
wife and child by the hand, they entered the car and were drawn up--into
a country far beyond the flight of birds, or the power of mortal eye to
pierce.

Great joy was manifested upon their arrival at the starry plains. The
Star Chief invited all his people to a feast; and when they had
assembled, he proclaimed aloud that each one might continue as he was,
an inhabitant of his own dominions, or select of the earthly gifts such
as he liked best. A very strange confusion immediately arose; not one
but sprang forward. Some chose a foot, some a wing, some a tail, and
some a claw. Those who selected tails or claws were changed into
animals, and ran off; the others assumed the form of birds, and flew
away. Waupee chose a white hawk's feather. His wife and son followed his
example, and each one became a white hawk. He spread his wings, and,
followed by his wife and son, descended with the other birds to the
earth, where he is still to be found, with the brightness of the starry
plains in his eye, and the freedom of the heavenly breezes in his
wings.






###
