 Americans are not the only people who hold a feast each year
 after the crops are gathered into barns.

 The older boys and girls who wish to know more of the jolly
 English farmer, Martin Poyser, and his household, will enjoy
 reading about them in George Eliot's great novel, "Adam
 Bede.

It was a goodly sight--that table, with Martin Poyser's round
good-humoured face and large person at the head of it, helping his
servants to the fragrant roast beef, and pleased when the empty plates
came again. Martin, though usually blest with a good appetite, really
forgot to finish his own beef to-night--it was so pleasant to him to
look on in the intervals of carving, and see how the others enjoyed
their supper; for were they not men who, on all the days of the year
except Christmas Day and Sundays, ate their cold dinner, in a
makeshift manner, under the hedgerows, and drank their beer out of
wooden bottles--with relish certainly, but with their mouths toward
the zenith, after a fashion more endurable to ducks than to human
bipeds. Martin Poyser had some faint conception of the flavour such
men must find in hot roast beef and fresh-drawn ale. He held his head
on one side, and screwed up his mouth, as he nudged Bartle Massey, and
watched half-witted Tom Tholer, otherwise known as "Tom Saft,receiving his second plateful of beef. A grin of delight broke over
Tom's face as the plate was set down before him, between his knife and
fork, which he held erect, as if they had been sacred tapers; but the
delight was too strong to continue smouldering in a grin--it burst out
the next moment in a long-drawn "haw, haw!" followed by a sudden
collapse into utter gravity, as the knife and fork darted down on the
prey. Martin Poyser's large person shook with his silent unctuous
laugh; he turned toward Mrs. Poyser to see if she, too, had been
observant of Tom, and the eyes of husband and wife met in a glance of
good-natured amusement.



But _now_ the roast beef was finished and the cloth was drawn, leaving
a fair large deal table for the bright drinking cans, and the foaming
brown jugs, and the bright brass candlesticks, pleasant to behold.
_Now_ the great ceremony of the evening was to begin--the harvest
song, in which every man must join; he might be in tune, if he liked
to be singular, but he must not sit with closed lips. The movement was
obliged to be in triple time; the rest was _ad libitum_.

As to the origin of this song--whether it came in its actual state
from the brain of a single rhapsodist, or was gradually perfected by a
school or succession of rhapsodists, I am ignorant. There is a stamp
of unity, of individual genius upon it, which inclines me to the
former hypothesis, though I am not blind to the consideration that
this unity may rather have arisen from that consensus of many minds
which was a condition of primitive thought foreign to our modern
consciousness. Some will perhaps think that they detect in the first
quatrain an indication of a lost line, which later rhapsodists,
failing in imaginative vigour, have supplied by the feeble device of
iteration; others, however, may rather maintain that this very
iteration is an original felicity to which none but the most prosaic
minds can be insensible.

The ceremony connected with the song was a drinking ceremony. (That is
perhaps a painful fact, but then, you know, we cannot reform our
forefathers.) During the first and second quatrain, sung decidedly
_forte_, no can was filled:

 "Here's a health unto our master,
 The founder of the feast;
 Here's a health unto our master
 And to our mistress!

 "And may his doings prosper,
 Whate'er he takes in hand,
 For we are all his servants,
 And are at his command.
But now, immediately before the third quatrain or chorus, sung
_fortissimo_, with emphatic raps on the table, which gave the effect
of cymbals and drum together. Alick's can was filled, and he was
bound to empty it before the chorus ceased.

 "Then drink, boys, drink!
 And see ye do not spill,
 For if ye do, ye shall drink two,
 For 'tis our master's will.
When Alick had gone successfully through this test of steady-handed
manliness, it was the turn of old Kester, at his right hand--and so
on, till every man had drunk his initiatory pint under the stimulus of
the chorus. Tom Saft--the rogue--took care to spill a little by
accident; but Mrs. Poyser (too officiously, Tom thought) interfered to
prevent the exaction of the penalty.

To any listener outside the door it would have been the reverse of
obvious why the "Drink, boys, drink!" should have such an immediate
and often-repeated encore; but once entered, he would have seen that
all faces were at present sober, and most of them serious; it was the
regular and respectable thing for those excellent farm-labourers to
do, as much as for elegant ladies and gentlemen to smirk and bow over
their wine glasses. Bartle Massey, whose ears were rather sensitive,
had gone out to see what sort of evening it was at an early stage in
the ceremony; and had not finished his contemplation, until a silence
of five minutes declared that "Drink, boys, drink!" was not likely to
begin again for the next twelve-month. Much to the regret of the boys
and Totty; on them the stillness fell rather flat, after that
glorious thumping of the table, toward which Totty, seated on her
father's knee, contributed with her small might and small fist.

When Bartle reÃ«ntered, however, there appeared to be a general desire
for solo music after the choral. Nancy declared that Tim the wagoner
knew a song and was "allays singing like a lark i' the stable";
whereupon Mr. Poyser said encouragingly, "Come, Tim, lad, let's hear
it." Tim looked sheepish, tucked down his head, and said he couldn't
sing; but this encouraging invitation of the master's was echoed all
round the table. It was a conversational opportunity: everybody could
say, "Come, Tim"--except Alick, who never relaxed into the frivolity
of unnecessary speech. At last Tim's next neighbour, Ben Tholoway,
began to give emphasis to his speech by nudges, at which Tim, growing
rather savage, said, "Let me alooan, will ye? else I'll ma' ye sing a
toon ye wonna like." A good-tempered wagoner's patience has limits,
and Tim was not to be urged further.

"Well, then, David, ye're the lad to sing," said Ben, willing to show
that he was not discomfited by this check. "Sing 'My loove's a roos
wi'out a thorn.'
The amatory David was a young man of an unconscious abstracted
expression, which was due probably to a squint of superior intensity
rather than to any mental characteristic; for he was not indifferent
to Ben's invitation, but blushed and laughed and rubbed his sleeve
over his mouth in a way that was regarded as a symptom of yielding.
And for some time the company appeared to be much in earnest about the
desire to hear David's song. But in vain. The lyrism of the evening
was in the cellar at present, and was not to be drawn from that
retreat just yet....
