My father was a rich merchant. He bequeathed me a large estate,
which I wasted in riotous living. I quickly, perceived that I was
misspending my time, which is of all things the most valuable. I
remembered the saying of the great Solomon, which I had frequently
heard from my father, "A good name is better than precious
ointment"; and again, "Wisdom is good with an inheritance." I
resolved to walk in my father's ways, and I entered into a
contract with some merchants, and embarked with them on board a
ship we had fitted out in partnership.

We set sail, and steered our course toward the Indies, through the
Persian Gulf. At first I was troubled with sea-sickness, but
speedily recovered my health. In our voyage we touched at several
islands, where we sold or exchanged our goods. One day we were
becalmed near a small island, but little elevated above the level
of the water, and resembling a green meadow. The captain ordered
his sails to be furled, and permitted such persons as were so
inclined to land. While we were enjoying ourselves eating and
drinking, and recovering from the fatigue of the sea, the island
of a sudden trembled and shook us terribly.

The trembling of the island was noticed on board ship, and we were
called upon to re-embark speedily, lest we should all be lost; for
what we took for an island proved to be the back of a sea monster.

The nimblest got into the sloop, others betook themselves to
swimming; but as for myself, I was still upon the island when it
disappeared into the sea, and I had only time to catch hold of a
piece of wood that we had brought out of the ship to make a fire.
Meanwhile, the captain, having received on board those who were in
the sloop, and taken up some of those that swam, resolved to take
advantage of the favorable gale that had just risen, and, hoisting
his sails, pursued his voyage.

Thus was I exposed to the mercy of the waves the rest of that day
and the following night. By this time I found my strength gone,
and despaired of saving my life, when happily a wave threw me on
an island. The bank was high and rugged, so that I could scarcely
have got up had it not been for some roots of trees which I found
within reach. When the sun arose I was very feeble. I found some
herbs fit to eat, and had the good luck to discover a spring of
excellent water. After this I advanced further into the island,
and at last reached a fine plain, where I perceived some horses
feeding. On my way toward them I heard the voice of a man, who
asked me who I was. I related to him my adventure, after which,
taking me by the hand, he led me into a cave, where there were
several other people, no less amazed to see me than I was to see
them.

I partook of some provisions which they offered me, and asked them
what they did in such a desert place; to which they answered that
they were grooms belonging to the sovereign of the island, and
that every year they brought thither the king's horses for
pasturage. They were to return home on the morrow, and had I been
one day later I must have perished, because the inhabited part of
the island was a great distance off, and it would have been
impossible for me to have reached it without a guide.

Next morning they returned to the capital of the island, took me
with them, and presented me to their king. He asked me who I was,
and by what adventure I had come into his dominions. After I had
satisfied him, he ordered that I should want for nothing.

Being a merchant, I frequented men of my own profession, and
particularly inquired for those who were strangers, that perchance
I might hear news from Bagdad, or find an opportunity to return.
For the Maharaja's capital is situated on the sea-coast, and has
a fine harbor, where ships arrive daily from the different
quarters of the world. I frequented also the society of the
learned Indians, and took delight to hear them converse; but
withal, I took care to make my court regularly to the Maharaja,
and conversed with the governors and petty kings, his tributaries,
that were about him. They put a thousand questions respecting my
country; and I, being willing to inform myself as to their laws
and customs, asked them concerning everything which I thought
worth knowing.

There belongs to this king an island named Cassel.

They assured me that every night a noise of drums was heard there,
whence the mariners fancied that it was the residence of Degial. I
determined to visit this wonderful place, and in my way thither
saw fishes of 100 and 200 cubits long that occasion more fear than
hurt; for they are so timorous that they will fly upon the
rattling of two sticks or boards. I saw likewise other fish about
a cubit in length, that had heads like owls.

As I was one day at the port after my return, the ship arrived in
which I had embarked at Bussorah. I at once knew the captain, and
I went and asked him for my bales. "I am Sindbad," said I, "and
those bales marked with his name are mine."

When the captain heard me speak thus, "Heavens!" he exclaimed,
"whom can we trust in these times? I saw Sindbad perish with my
own eyes, as did also the passengers on board, and yet you tell me
you are that Sindbad. What impudence is this! and what a false
tale to tell, in order to possess yourself of what does not belong
to you!" "Have patience," replied I; "do me the favor to hear what
I have to say." The captain was at length persuaded that I was no
cheat; for there came people from his ship who knew me, paid me
great compliments, and expressed much joy at seeing me alive. At
last he recollected me himself, and embracing me, "Heaven be
praised," said he, "for your happy escape! I cannot express the
joy it affords me. There are your goods; take and do with them as
you please."

I took out what was most valuable in my bales, and presented them
to the Maharaja, who, knowing my misfortune, asked me how I came
by such rarities. I acquainted him with the circumstance of their
recovery. He was pleased at my good luck, accepted my present, and
in return gave me one much more considerable. Upon this I took
leave of him, and went aboard the same ship, after I had exchanged
my goods for the commodities of that country. I carried with me
wood of aloes, sandals, camphire, nutmegs, cloves, pepper, and
ginger. We passed by several islands, and at last arrived at
Bussorah, from whence I came to this city, with the value of
100,000 sequins.

Sindbad stopped here, and ordered the musicians to proceed with
their concert, which the story had interrupted. When it was
evening, Sindbad sent for a purse of 100 sequins, and giving it to
the porter, said, "Take this, Hindbad, return to your home, and
come back to-morrow to hear more of my adventures." The porter
went away, astonished at the honor done him and the present made
him. The account of this adventure proved very agreeable to his
wife and children, who did not fail to return thanks for what
Providence had sent them by the hand of Sindbad.

Hindbad put on his best robe next day, and returned to the
bountiful traveller, who received him with a pleasant air, and
welcomed him heartily. When all the guests had arrived, dinner was
served, and continued a long time. When it was ended, Sindbad,
addressing himself to the company, said, "Gentlemen, be pleased to
listen to the adventures of my second voyage. They deserve your
attention even more than those of the first." Upon which every one
held his peace, and Sindbad proceeded.


