After I had rested from the dangers of my third voyage, my passion
for trade and my love of novelty soon again prevailed. I therefore
settled my affairs, and provided a stock of goods fit for the
traffic I designed to engage in. I took the route of Persia,
travelled over several provinces, and then arrived at a port,
where I embarked. On putting out to sea, we were overtaken by such
a sudden gust of wind as obliged the captain to lower his yards
and take all other necessary precautions to prevent the danger
that threatened us. But all was in vain; our endeavors had no
effect; the sails were split into a thousand pieces, and the ship
was stranded; several of the merchants and seamen were drowned,
and the cargo was lost.

I had the good fortune, with several of the merchants and
mariners, to get upon some planks, and we were carried by the
current to an island which lay before us. There we found fruit and
spring water, which preserved our lives. We stayed all night near
the place where we had been cast ashore.

Next morning, as soon as the sun was up, we explored the island,
and saw some houses, which we approached. As soon as we drew near,
we were encompassed by a great number of negroes, who seized us,
shared us among them, and carried us to their respective
habitations.

I and five of my comrades were carried to one place; here they
made us sit down, and gave us a certain herb, which they made
signs to us to eat. My comrades not taking notice that the blacks
ate none of it themselves, thought only of satisfying their
hunger, and ate with greediness. But I, suspecting some trick,
would not so much as taste it, which happened well for me; for in
a little time after I perceived my companions had lost their
senses, and that when they spoke to me they knew not what they
said.

The negroes fed us afterward with rice, prepared with oil of
cocoanuts; and my comrades, who had lost their reason, ate of it
greedily. I also partook of it, but very sparingly. They gave us
that herb at first on purpose to deprive us of our senses, that we
might not be aware of the sad destiny prepared for us; and they
supplied us with rice to fatten us; for, being cannibals, their
design was to eat us as soon as we grew fat. This accordingly
happened, for they devoured my comrades, who were not sensible of
their condition; but my senses being entire, you may easily guess
that instead of growing fat, as the rest did, I grew leaner every
day. The fear of death under which I labored turned all my food
into poison. I fell into a languishing distemper, which proved my
safety; for the negroes, having killed and eaten my companions,
seeing me to be withered, lean and sick, deferred my death.

Meanwhile I had much liberty, so that scarcely any notice was
taken of what I did, and this gave me an opportunity one day to
get at a distance from the houses and to make my escape. An old
man who saw me, and suspected my design, called to me as loud as
he could to return; but instead of obeying him I redoubled my
speed, and quickly got out of sight. At that time there was none
but the old man about the houses, the rest being abroad, and not
to return till night, which was usual with them. Therefore, being
sure that they could not arrive in time to pursue me, I went on
till night, when I stopped to rest a little, and to eat some of
the provisions I had secured; but I speedily set forward again,
and travelled seven days, avoiding those places which seemed to be
inhabited, and lived for the most part upon cocoanuts, which
served me both for meat and drink. On the eighth day I came near
the sea, and saw some white people like myself gathering pepper,
of which there was great plenty in that place. This I took to be a
good omen, and went to them without any scruple.

The people who gathered pepper came to meet me as soon as they saw
me, and asked me in Arabic who I was, and whence I came. I was
overjoyed to hear them speak in my own language, and satisfied
their curiosity by giving them an account of my shipwreck, and how
I fell into the hands of the negroes. "Those negroes," replied
they, "eat men; and by what miracle did you escape their
cruelty?" I related to them the circumstances I have just
mentioned, at which they were wonderfully surprised.

I stayed with them till they had gathered their quantity of
pepper, and then sailed with them to the island from whence they
had come. They presented me to their king, who was a good prince.
He had the patience to hear the relation of my adventures, which
surprised him, and he afterward gave me clothes, and commanded
care to be taken of me.

The island was very well peopled, plentiful in everything, and the
capital a place of great trade. This agreeable retreat was very
comfortable to me after my misfortunes, and the kindness of this
generous prince completed my satisfaction. In a word, there was
not a person more in favor with him than myself, and consequently
every man in court and city sought to oblige me, so that in a very
little time I was looked upon rather as a native than a stranger.

I observed one thing, which to me appeared very extraordinary. All
the people, the king himself not excepted, rode their horses
without bridle or stirrups. I went one day to a workman, and gave
him a model for making the stock of a saddle. When that was done,
I covered it myself with velvet and leather, and embroidered it
with gold. I afterward went to a smith, who made me a bit,
according to the pattern I showed him, and also some stirrups.
When I had all things completed, I presented them to the king, and
put them upon one of his horses. His majesty mounted immediately,
and was so pleased with them that he testified his satisfaction by
large presents.

I made several others for the ministers and principal officers of
his household, which gained me great reputation and regard.

As I paid my court very constantly to the king, he said to me one
day, "Sindbad, I love thee, I have one thing to demand of thee,
which thou must grant. I have a mind thou shouldst marry, that so
thou mayst stay in my dominions, and think no more of thy own
country." I durst not resist the prince's will, and he gave me one
of the ladies of his court, noble, beautiful, and rich. The
ceremonies of marriage being over, I went and dwelt with my wife
and for some time we lived together in perfect harmony. I was not,
however, satisfied with my banishment; therefore designed to make
my escape the first opportunity, and to return to Bagdad, which my
present settlement, how advantageous soever, could not make me
forget.

At this time the wife of one of my neighbors, with whom I had
contracted a very strict friendship, fell sick and died. I went
to see and comfort him in his affliction, and, finding him
absorbed in sorrow, I said to him as soon as I saw him, "God
preserve you and grant you a long life." "Alas!" replied he, "how
do you think I should obtain the favor you wish me? I have not
above an hour to live, for I must be buried this day with my wife.
This is a law in this island. The living husband is interred with
the dead wife, and the living wife with the dead husband.
While he was giving an account of this barbarous custom, the very
relation of which chilled my blood, his kindred, friends, and
neighbors came to assist at the funeral. They dressed the corpse
of the woman in her richest apparel and all her jewels as if it
had been her wedding day; then they placed her on an open bier,
and began their march to the place of burial. The husband walked
first, next to the dead body. They proceeded to a high mountain,
and when they had reached the place of their destination, they
took up a large stone which formed the mouth of a deep pit, and
let down the body with all its apparel and jewels. Then the
husband, embracing his kindred and friends, suffered himself to be
placed on another bier without resistance, with a pot of water and
seven small loaves, and was let down in the same manner. The
ceremony being over, the mouth of the pit was again covered with
the stone, and the company returned.

I mention this ceremony the more particularly, because I was in a
few weeks' time to be the principal actor on a similar occasion.
Alas! my own wife fell sick and died. I made every remonstrance I
could to the king not to expose me, a foreigner, to this inhuman
law. I appealed in vain. The king and all his court, with the most
considerable persons in the city, sought to soften my sorrow by
honoring the funeral ceremony with their presence; and, at the
termination of the ceremony, I was lowered into the pit, with a
vessel full of water and seven loaves. As I approached the bottom,
I discovered, by the aid of the little light that came from
above, the nature of this subterranean place. It seemed an endless
cavern, and might be about fifty fathoms deep. I lived for some
time there upon my bread and water, when one day, just as it was
on the point of exhaustion, I heard something tread, and breathing
or panting as it moved. I followed the sound. The animal seemed to
stop sometimes, but always fled and breathed hard as I approached.
I pursued it for a considerable time, till at last I perceived a
light, resembling a star. I went on, sometimes lost sight of it,
but always found it again, and at last discovered that it came
through a hole in the rock, which I got through, and found myself
upon the seashore, at which I felt exceeding joy. I prostrated
myself on the shore to thank God for this mercy, and shortly
afterward I perceived a ship making for the place where I was. I
made a sign with the linen of my turban, and called to the crew as
loud as I could. They heard me, and sent a boat to bring me on
board. It was fortunate for me that these people did not inspect
the place where they found me, but without hesitation took me on
board.

We passed by several islands, and, among others, that called the
Isle of Bells, about ten days' sail from Serendib with a regular
wind, and six from that of Kela, where we landed. Lead mines are
found in the island; also Indian canes and excellent camphire.

The king of the Isle of Kela is very rich and powerful, and the
Isle of Bells, which is about two days' journey in extent, is also
subject to him.

The inhabitants are so barbarous that they still eat human flesh.
After we had finished our traffic in that island we put to sea
again, and touched at several other ports; at last I arrived
happily at Bagdad. Out of gratitude to God for His mercies, I
contributed liberally toward the support of several mosques and
the subsistence of the poor, and enjoyed myself with friends in
festivities and amusements.

Here Sindbad made a new present of one hundred sequins to Hindbad,
whom he requested to return with the rest next day at the same
hour, to dine with him and hear the story of his fifth voyage.
