It befell upon a time when King Arthur was Pendragon, or overlord of
the island of Britain, that Earl Evroc held an earldom of large
dominion in the north under King Uriens. And the earl had seven sons,
the last being but a child still at play about his mother's chair as
she sat with her maidens in the bower.

Lord Evroc was a valiant and a mighty warrior, ever battling against
the hated pagans, when their bands of blue-eyed fierce fighters landed
on his coasts. And when peace was on the land, he went about on
errantry, jousting in tournaments and fighting champions.

His six elder sons did likewise, and all were famed for their knightly
prowess.

But the mother sat at home, sad of mood. For she hated war, and would
rather have had her lord and her six tall sons about her in the home.
And in her heart she resolved that she would plead with Evroc to let
her have her little son Perceval to be a clerk or a learned bard, so
that he should stay at home with her and run no risk of death.

The sorrow she was ever dreading smote her at length. For a messenger
came one day, saying that Earl Evroc her lord had been slain at
Bamborough, in a mighty mel√©e between some of the best and most valiant
knights of Logres and Alban, and two tall sons with him.

As the years passed, and her little son began to run, three black days
came within a little of each other, for on these days messengers came
with the sad news of the death of her other boys. One of them had been
done to death by an evil troll on the lonely wastes by the Roman wall,
two others were slain by the shores of Humber, repelling a horde of
fair-haired Saxon raiders, and the other was killed at a ford, where he
had kept at bay six bandit knights that would have pursued and slain
his wounded lord.

Then, in her grief, the widow dame resolved that she would fly with her
little son, and make a home for him in some wilderness, where never
sounds or sights of war or death would come, where knights would be
unknown, and no one would speak to him of arms and battles. And thus
did she do, and she left the hall where she had lived, and removed to
the deserts and wastes of the wilderness, and took with her only her
women, and a few boys and spiritless men, too old or feeble to fight,
or to think of fighting.

Thus she reared the only son left to her, teaching him all manner of
nobleness in thought and action and in learning, but never suffering
him to see a weapon, nor to hear a tale of war or knightly prowess.

He grew up loving all noble things, gentle of speech and bearing, but
quick to anger at evil or mean actions, merciful of weak things, and
full of pity and tenderness.

Yet was he also very strong of body, fleet of foot, quick of eye and
hand. Daily he went to divert himself in the great dark forest that
climbed the high mountains beside his home, or he roamed the wide
rolling moors. And he practised much with the throwing of stones and
sticks, so that with a stick he could hit a small mark at a great
distance, and with a sharp stone he could cut down a sapling at one
blow.

One day he saw a flock of his mother's goats in the forest, and near
them stood two hinds. The boy wondered greatly to see the two deer
which had no horns, while the goats had two each; and he thought they
had long run wild, and had lost their horns in that way. He thought he
would please his mother if he caught them, so that they should not
escape again. And by his great activity and swiftness he ran the two
deer down till they were spent, and then he took them and shut them up
in the goat-house in the forest.

Going home, he told his mother and her servants what he had done, and
they went to see, and marvelled that he could catch such fleet
creatures as the wild red deer.

Once he overheard his mother say that she yearned for fresh venison,
but that the hunter who was attached to her house was lying wounded by
a wild boar. Always Perceval had wondered what the little dark man did
whom they called the hunter, who was always so secret, so that Perceval
could never see where he went or when he returned from the forest.

So he went to the hut where Tod the hunter lay sick, and charged him by
the love and worship he bore to the countess, that he should tell him
how he could obtain fresh venison. And the dwarf told him.

Then Perceval took a few sticks of stout wood, with points hardened by
fire, and went into the forest as Tod had told him, and seeing a deer
he hurled a stick at it and slew it. And then he brought it home.

The countess was greatly wroth that Tod had taught him how to slay, and
she said that never more should the dwarf serve her. And Tod wept, but
when he was well again the countess would not suffer him to stay, but
said he should leave the hall and never come there again.

She commanded Perceval never to slay any more living things, and the
lad promised. But hard was it to keep his word, when he was in the
forest and saw the wild things passing through the brakes.

Once, as he strayed deep in the wood, he came upon a wide glade or
laund, with two green hillocks in the middle thereof. And feeding upon
the grass was a great buck, and it had a silver ring round its neck.
Perceval wondered at this beast being thus adorned, and went up to it
to stroke it.

But the buck was fierce, and would have gored him with its horns, but
Perceval seized them, and after a great struggle he threw the animal,
and held it down, and in his wrath he would have slain it with a sharp
stick. With that a swarm of little angry trolls poured from the hollow
hillocks with great cries, and seizing Perceval would have hurt him.

But suddenly Tod ran among them, and commanded them to release him. And
in the end Tod, who came himself of the troll folk, made the little
people pass the words of peace and friendship with Perceval, and ever
after that the boy went with the trolls, and sported with them in
wrestling, running and other games; and he learned many things of great
wisdom from them concerning the secrets of the earth and air and the
wind, and the spirits that haunt waste places and standing stones, and
how to put to naught the power of witches and wizards.

Tod ever bade them treat the young lord with reverence. 'For this is he
who shall do great deeds,' he said. 'He shall be a stainless knight,
who shall gain from evil the greatest strength, and, if God wills, he
shall beat down the evil powers in this land.'

But the lad knew not what he meant, though he was very content to have
the trolls for his friends.

One day Perceval was in the forest far up the mountain, and he looked
over the blue distance far below across the moor, and saw a man riding
on a wide road which he had never noticed before. And the man rode very
fast, and as he went the sun seemed to flash from him as if he was
clothed in glass. Perceval wondered what he was, and resolved to go
across the moor to the road he had seen.

When he reached the road he found it was very broad, and banked on
either side, and went straight as the flight of a wild duck right
across the moor, and never swerved by the hills or pools, but went over
everything in its way. And as he stood marvelling what mighty men had
builded it, he heard a strange rattling sound behind him, and, turning,
he saw three men on horseback, and the sun shone from them as he had
seen it shine from the first horseman.

The foremost checked his horse beside Perceval, and said:

'Tell me, good soul, sawest thou a knight pass this way either this day
or yesterday?'

'I know not what a knight is,' answered Perceval.

'Such a one as I,' said the horseman, smiling good-naturedly, for it
was Sir Owen, one of King Arthur's knights.

'If ye will tell me what I ask, I will tell you,' said Perceval.